build-std: first iteration (#1)
davidtwco/rfcs: text/0000-build-std.md

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> One paragraph explanation of the feature.

**TODO:** after context sections accepted

# Terminology
[terminology]: #terminology

The following terminology is used throughout the RFC:

- "the standard library" is used to refer to all of the crates that comprise the
  standard library - `core`, `alloc` and `std`
- "std" is used to refer only to the `std` crate, not the entirety of the standard
  library

# Background
[background]: #background

*See [*Implementation summary*][implementation-summary] for a summary of the
current unstable build-std feature in Cargo. This section aims to introduce any
relevant details about the standard library and compiler that are assumed
knowledge by referenced sources.*

Since the first stable release of Rust, the standard library has been distributed
as a pre-built artifact via rustup, which has a variety of advantages and/or
rationale:

- It saves Rust users from having to rebuild the standard library whenever they
  start a project or do a clean build
- The standard library has and has had dependencies which require a more complicated
  build environment than typical Rust projects

>   - e.g. requiring a working C toolchain to build `libbacktrace` (prior to [rust#46439])

Reviewer: The `c` `compiler-builtins` feature is enabled by default for all Tier 1 targets iirc so maybe that would be a better example than `libbacktrace` or `libunwind` since it can have a pretty substantial impact on code size & quality.

Author: `compiler-builtins/c` is a better example, changed to that

largely been removed over time - for example, `libbacktrace` previously depended
on `backtrace-sys` but now uses `gimli` ([rust#46439]) - there are still some C
dependencies:

- `libunwind` will either link to the LLVM `libunwind` or the system's
  `libunwind`/`libgcc_s`. LLVM's `libunwind` is shipped as part of the
  rustup component for the standard library and will be linked against
  when `-Clink-self-contained` is used
  - This only applies to Linux and Fuchsia targets
- `compiler_builtins` has an optional `c` feature that will use optimised
  routines from `compiler-rt` when enabled, which is enabled for the pre-built
  standard library
- `compiler_builtins` has an optional `mem` feature that provides symbols
  for common memory routines (e.g. `memcpy`)
  - It isn't used by when `std` is built as `libc` provides these routines,
    but is often used by `no_std` crates when there is not a system `libc`
- To use sanitizers, the sanitizer runtimes from LLVM's compiler-rt need to
  be linked against. Building of these is enabled in `bootstrap.toml`
  ([`build.sanitizers`][bootstrap-sanitizers]) and they are not currently

>   included in the rustup components shipped by the project.

Reviewer: The general point is correct but something in the details is off... I have a minimal install of stable Rust and the following works:

```
$ cat oob.rs
fn main() {
    let xs = [0, 1, 2, 3];
    let _y = unsafe { *xs.as_ptr().offset(4) };
}
$ RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP=1 rustc -Zsanitizer=address oob.rs
$ ./oob
=================================================================
==174==ERROR: AddressSanitizer: stack-buffer-overflow on address 0x6fed8ebde070 at pc 0x64ad5e7ea0ea bp 0x7ffd43e7a670 sp 0x7ffd43e7a668
READ of size 4 at 0x6fed8ebde070 thread T0
    #0 0x64ad5e7ea0e9  (/tmp/oob+0xc70e9) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #1 0x64ad5e7e9ed2  (/tmp/oob+0xc6ed2) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #2 0x64ad5e7e9e85  (/tmp/oob+0xc6e85) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #3 0x64ad5e7e9e68  (/tmp/oob+0xc6e68) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #4 0x64ad5e80482f  (/tmp/oob+0xe182f) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #5 0x64ad5e7e9ddd  (/tmp/oob+0xc6ddd) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #6 0x64ad5e7ea164  (/tmp/oob+0xc7164) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
    #7 0x73ed90a27efa  (/usr/lib/libc.so.6+0x27efa)
    #8 0x73ed90a27fba  (/usr/lib/libc.so.6+0x27fba)
    #9 0x64ad5e731a64  (/tmp/oob+0xea64) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)

Address 0x6fed8ebde070 is located in stack of thread T0 at offset 48 in frame
    #0 0x64ad5e7e9f9f  (/tmp/oob+0xc6f9f) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)

  This frame has 1 object(s):
    [32, 48) 'xs' <== Memory access at offset 48 overflows this variable
HINT: this may be a false positive if your program uses some custom stack unwind mechanism, swapcontext or vfork
      (longjmp and C++ exceptions *are* supported)
SUMMARY: AddressSanitizer: stack-buffer-overflow (/tmp/oob+0xc70e9) (BuildId: 215580bd8eaf0d7f137585d695478129f8afc0b4)
Shadow bytes around the buggy address:
  0x6fed8ebddd80: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebdde00: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebdde80: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebddf00: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebddf80: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
=>0x6fed8ebde000: f1 f1 f1 f1 00 f3 f3 f3 f1 f1 f1 f1 00 00[f3]f3
  0x6fed8ebde080: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebde100: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebde180: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebde200: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
  0x6fed8ebde280: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
Shadow byte legend (one shadow byte represents 8 application bytes):
  Addressable:           00
  Partially addressable: 01 02 03 04 05 06 07
  Heap left redzone:       fa
  Freed heap region:       fd
  Stack left redzone:      f1
  Stack mid redzone:       f2
  Stack right redzone:     f3
  Stack after return:      f5
  Stack use after scope:   f8
  Global redzone:          f9
  Global init order:       f6
  Poisoned by user:        f7
  Container overflow:      fc
  Array cookie:            ac
  Intra object redzone:    bb
  ASan internal:           fe
  Left alloca redzone:     ca
  Right alloca redzone:    cb
==174==ABORTING
```

I assume we're shipping the runtime somewhere but I don't see it offhand in the sysroot.

Reviewer 2: Yea, I'm not sure if this comment was intending to say that the "compiler-rt sources are not shipped in a rustup component" which is correct.

The sanitizers are shipped as part of the sysroot. It depends on the target, but the name is usually something like  `lib/rustlib/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/lib/librustc-nightly_rt.asan.a`. It's a dylib on macos.

Author: I don't know why I thought we didn't yet ship these. Just a mixup on my part, fixed.

[target-support-of-the-standard-library]: #target-support-of-the-standard-library

The `std` crate's `build.rs` checks for supported values of the
`CARGO_CFG_TARGET_OS` environment variable. `CARGO_CFG_TARGET_OS` corresponds to
the "os" part of a target triple, e.g. "linux" in "aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu".

When encountering an unknown or unsupported operating system then the
`restricted_std` cfg is set. `restricted_std` marks the entire standard library
as unstable, requiring `feature(restricted_std)` to be enabled on any crate
that depends on it. There is no mechanism for users to enable the `restricted_std`
feature on behalf of dependencies.

## Panic strategies
[panic-strategies]: #panic-strategies

There are two panic crates in the standard library - `panic_unwind` and
`panic_abort` - that provide implementations of panic behaviour. rustc has
a `-Cpanic` flag that allows the user to chose the panic strategy, though the
"unwind" option may not be chosen if the target does not support it.

Both crates are compiled and shipped with the pre-built standard library for 
targets which support `std`. All targets which support the `std` crate default

> to the unwinding panic strategy. Some targets with a pre-built standard library

Reviewer 2: There are a number of `std` targets that default to `abort` (like wasi, hermit, espidf, etc.).

Author: Fixed, just removed that sentence

  - There is no stable mechanism for using the standard library for a tier three
    target that does not ship a pre-built std. Similarly, custom targets (using
    target-spec-json) cannot use the standard library
  - While it is common for these targets to not support the standard library,
    they should be able to use `core`
  - These users are forced to use nightly and the unstable `-Zbuild-std`
    feature or third-party tools like [cargo-xbuild] (formerly [xargo])
2. **Re-building the standard library with different codegen flags or profile** ([wg-cargo-std-aware#2])
 - Embedded users need to optimise aggressively for size, due to the limited
   space available on their target platforms, which can be achieved in Cargo by
   setting `opt-level = s/z` and `panic = "abort"` in their profile. However,
   these settings will not apply to the pre-built standard library
 - Similarly, when deploying to known environments, use of `target-cpu` or
   `target-feature` can improve the performance of code generation or allow the
   use of newer hardware features than the target's baseline provides. As above,
   these configuration will not apply to the pre-built standard library

>  - While the pre-built standard library is to support debugging without

Reviewer: nit: some word is missing in this phrase "library is {built?} to support"

   to require nightly and build its own sysroot
3. **Unblock stabilisation of ABI-modifying compiler flags**
  - Any compiler flags which change the ABI cannot currently be stabilised as they
    would immediately mismatch with the pre-built standard library
    - Without an ability to rebuild the standard library using these flags, it is
      would be impossible to use them effectively and safely if stabilised
  - ABI-modifying flags are designated as target modifiers ([rfcs#3716]/[rust#136966])
    and require that the same value for the flag is passed to all compilation units
    - Flags which need to be set across the entire crate graph to uphold some
      property (i.e. enhanced security) are also target modifiers
    - For example: sanitizers, control flow integriy, `-Zfixed-x18`, etc
4. **Enabling Cargo features for the standard library** ([wg-cargo-std-aware#4])
  - There are opportunities to expose Cargo features from the standard library that
    would be useful for certain subsets of the Rust users.
    - For example, embedded users may want to enable a feature like `optimize_for_size` or
      `panic_immediate_abort` to reduce binary size

> 5. **Building standard library crates than are not shipped for a target**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Building standard library crates that are not shipped for a target**
```

Author: Fixed

>   - Profile-guided optimisation requires the `profiler_builtins` crate which is not

Reviewer: There's a `libprofiler_builtins.rlib` in the sysroot at least for x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu that looks like it is used for this purpose.

Author: Not sure why I also thought we didn't distribute this

    currently distributed as part of the `rust-std` rustup component
  - Targets which have limited `std` support may wish to use the subsets of the
    standard library which do work
6. **Modifying the source code of the standard library** ([wg-cargo-std-aware#7])
  - Some platforms require a heavily modified standard library that would not
    be suitable for upstreaming, such as [Apache's SGX SDK][sgx] which replaces
    some standard library and ecosystem crates with forks or custom crates for a
    custom `x86_64-unknown-linux-sgx` target
  - Similarly, some tier three targets may wish to patch standard library
    dependencies to add or improve support for the target
7. **Building the standard library on a stable toolchain without Cargo**
  - While tangential to the core of build-std as a feature, projects like Rust
    for Linux want to be able to build an unmodified `core` from `rust-src` in
    the sysroot on a stable toolchain without Cargo
  - Cargo may also want a mechanism to build the standard library for build-std

>     on a stable toolchain without relying on `RUST_BOOTSTRAP`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    on a stable toolchain without relying on `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`
```

Author: Fixed

> detail that:
>
> - Its interaction with other features is clear.
> - It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
> - Corner cases are dissected by example.
> 
> The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and
> explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

**TODO:** after context sections accepted

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> Why should we *not* do this?

**TODO:** after context sections accepted

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> - Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
> - What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for
>   not choosing them?
> - What is the impact of not doing this?
> - If this is a language proposal, could this be done in a library or macro
>   instead? Does the proposed change make Rust code easier or harder to
>   read, understand, and maintain?

**TODO:** after context sections accepted

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

*The following summary of the prior art is necessarily less detailed than the
source material, which is exhaustively surveyed in

> [Appendix I: Exhasutive literature review][appendix-i].*

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
[Appendix I: Exhaustive literature review][appendix-i].*
```

Author: Fixed

   the standard library is desirable (for the same reasons as any vendoring), but would
   lock the user to a specific version of the toolchain when using a vendored standard
   library. However, if the `rust-src` component contained already-vendored dependencies,
   then `cargo vendor` would not need to support build-std and users would see the same
   advantages.

   Vendored standard library dependencies were implemented using a hacky approach
   (necessarily, prior to the standard library having its own workspace), but this was
   later reverted due to bugs. No attempt has been made to reimplement vendoring since
   the standard library has had its own workspace.

3. **Dependencies of the standard library**

   There are a handful of dependencies of the standard library that may pose challenges
   for build-std by dint of needing a working C toolchain or special-casing.

   [`libbacktrace`][wg-cargo-std-aware#16] previously required a C compiler to build
   `backtrace-sys`, but now uses `gimli` internally.

   [`compiler_builtins`][wg-cargo-std-aware#15] has a `c` feature that uses C versions
   of some intrinsics that are more optimised. This is used by the pre-built standard

>    library, and if not used by build-std, could be a point of divergence. It also has

Reviewer: It might be useful to emphasize that without the `c` feature, code quality and size may also suffer which could be bigger concerns to users than diverging from the pre-built standard library might otherwise be.

Author: Added

   different unit.

   [Sanitizers][wg-cargo-std-aware#17], when enabled, require a sanitizer runtime
   to be present. These are currently built by bootstrap and part of LLVM.

4. **Design considerations**

   There are many design considerations discussed in the [wg-cargo-std-aware]
   repository:

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#5] explored how/if dependencies on the standard library should
   be declared. The issue claims that users should have to opt-in to build-std, support
   alternative standard library implementations, and that Cargo needs to be able to
   pass `--extern` to rustc for all dependencies.

   It is an open question how to handle multiple dependencies each declaring a dependency
   on the standard library. A preference towards unifying standard library dependencies
   was expressed (these would have no concept of a version, so just union all features).

   There was no consensus on how to find a balance between explicitly depending on the
   standard library versus implicitly, or on whether the pre-built-ness of a dependency
   should be surfaced to the user.

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#6] argues that target-spec-json would be de-facto stable if

>    it can be used by build-std on stable, and this would need an explicit decision.

Reviewer: Could be helpful to expand on the "de-facto stable" comment and note that `--target custom.json` is accepted on stable but probably cannot be used in practice since there's no stable way to create a standard library using the same target, thus it's not possible to compile Rust code using custom targets on stable.

Author: Fixed

   These aren't especially relevant to this summary, see [the relevant section of the
   literature review for more detail][cargo-feature-requests-narrowly-applied-to-build-std]

Since around 2020, activity in the [wg-cargo-std-aware] repository largely trailed off
and there have not been any significant developments related to build-std since.

### Implementation summary
[implementation-summary]: #implementation-summary

*An exhaustive review of implementation-related issues, pull requests and discussions
can be found in [the relevant section of the literature review][implementation].*

There has been an unstable and experimental implementation of build-std in Cargo
since August 2019 ([wg-cargo-std-aware#10]/[cargo#7216]).

[cargo#7216] added the [`-Zbuild-std`][build-std] flag to Cargo. `-Zbuild-std`
re-builds the standard library crates which rustc then uses instead of the
pre-built standard library from the sysroot.

`-Zbuild-std` builds `std` by default. `test` is also built if tests are being
run. Optionally, users can provide the list of crates to be built, though this
was intended as an escape hatch to work around bugs - the arguments to the flag

> are inherently unstable since the names of crates comprising the standard

Reviewer: Maybe "semi-unstable" since new crates could always be added but `extern crate core` has to always work?

Author: Fixed

component. This does not happen automatically and the user must ensure the
component has been downloaded themselves. Only the standard library crates from
the [rust-lang/rust] repository are included in the `rust-src` depdendency (i.e.
none of the crates.io dependencies).

When `-Zbuild-std` has been passed, Cargo creates a second workspace for the
standard library based on the `Cargo.{toml,lock}` from the `rust-src` component.
Originally this was a virtual workspace, prior to the standard library having a
separate workspace from the compiler which could be used independently
([rust#128534]/[cargo#14358]). This workspace is then resolved separately and
the resolve is combined with the user's resolve to produce a dependency graph of
things to build with the user's crates depending on the standard library's
crates. Some additional work is done to deduplicate crates across the graph and
then this crate graph is used to drive work (usually `rustc` invocations) as
usual. This approach allows for build-time parallelism and sharing of crates
between the two separate resolves but does involve a lot of `build-std`-specific

> logic in and around the resolver - an important and complicated part of Cargo.

Reviewer 2: Just to clarify some terminology here. The "resolver" wasn't modified or affected at all. What was modified is called "unit generation".

The only impact in cargo was that it added some extra steps when generating the unit graph to:

1. Load the sysroot workspace.
2. Run the resolver on it.
3. Generate the "units" for the sysroot.
4. Attach those units as dependencies of all units in the user's build graph.

The last two steps are essentially the two function calls (`calc_deps_of_std` and `attach_std_deps`)  in what we call `build_unit_dependencies`: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/f6cea42b7988fd737409abc7521a9ade796c26cf/src/cargo/core/compiler/unit_dependencies.rs#L129-L137

I wouldn't characterize it as "a lot of `build-std`-specific logic", since those are all pretty straightforward steps. Of course it would be nice to avoid as much special-case code as possible, but due to the inherent specialness of the sysroot, it's pretty hard to avoid.

Author: Reworded this paragraph

When first implemented, the multiple resolver approach was considered a
short-term solution and that it was "quite messy and causes a lot of

> complications". While alternative solutions have been proposed

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if that is something I said, but it was never intended to be a short-term solution. Fairly early on we decided it was unavoidable.

It does result in that the standard library crates are otherwise hidden to the rest of cargo. For example `cargo tree`, `cargo metadata`, `cargo vendor` (since fixed) all act as-if the standard library doesn't exist. Each command needs special handling to support it. However, in many cases that might be what we want anyways.

Author: Reworded this too

library are used, which is a key constraint ([wg-cargo-std-aware#12]). Locking
the standard library could also help ([wg-cargo-std-aware#38]).

The standard library crates are considered non-local packages and so are not
compiled with incremental compilation or dep-info fingerprint tracking and any
warnings will be silenced.

build-std provides newly-built standard library dependencies to `rustc` using
`--extern noprelude:$crate`. `noprelude` was added in [rust#67074] to support
build-std and ensure that loading from the sysroot and using `--extern` were
equivalent ([wg-cargo-std-aware#40]). Prior to the addition of `noprelude`,
build-std briefly created new sysroots and used those instead of `--extern`
([cargo#7421]). rustc can still try to load a crate from the sysroot if the user
uses it which is currently a common source of confusing "duplicate lang item"
errors (as the user ends up with build-std `core` and sysroot `core`
conflicting).

Host dependencies like build scripts and `proc_macro` crates use the
existing pre-built standard library from the sysroot, so Cargo does not
pass `--extern` to those.

> Modifications to the standard library are not supported. While build-std does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modifications to the standard library are not supported. While build-std
```

Author: Fixed

has no mechanism to detect or prevent modifications to the `rust-src` content,
rebuilds aren't triggered automatically on modifications. The user cannot
override dependencies in the standard library workspace with `[patch]` sections
of their `Cargo.toml`.

To prevent the user from using `std` on an unsupported target and running into
bugs, some target filtering exists in `std`'s [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] which
marks the standard library as unstable for unsupported targets. Users enable the
`restricted_std` feature in their crates to opt into this instability. This
mechanism has been noted as confusing ([wg-cargo-std-aware#87]) and has the
issue that the user cannot opt into the feature on behalf of dependencies

> ([wg-cargo-std-aware#69]).

Reviewer 2: Just a note: It was not the primary goal of `restricted_std` to allow a user to actually specify `#![feature(restricted_std)]`. 

The primary goal was to allow cargo to be "dumb", and always build `std` for every target, even if it doesn't officially support it. That way, the user wouldn't need to specify whether or not they want `std` via the build-std mechanism (just a plain `-Zbuild-std` CLI flag). They would specify whether they want to exclude std via `#![no_std]` attribute.

If the user does not specify `#![no_std]` on a no-std target, then that's when they get the confusing error message. It was intended to eventually have a better error message.

In theory, `std` should build for every target. This is accomplished via the [`unsupported`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/f768dc01da9a681716724418ccf64ce55bd396c5/library/std/src/sys/pal/unsupported/mod.rs) module. That stubs out any OS-specific things for all targets that don't implement those things.

It was only a hypothetical future goal to maybe provide a mechanism to relax or remove the `restricted_std` feature to open up `std` for all targets, but that was a very fuzzy concept that would need more buy-in and design. This ties in a little to the "facade" concept, where the standard library could be combined into one thing.

Author: Reworded this as well

      separate from user's dependency versions
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#13]: Default feature specification**, [ehuss], Jul 2019
  - How to determine the default set of cfg values for the standard library?
    - Currently set by bootstrap
    - Also sets environment variables used by build scripts (e.g. `LLVM_CONFIG`)
  - Various possibilities
    - Hardcode in Cargo, not idea long-term
    - Some configuration in source distribution
    - Make user explicitly declare them
  - Similar to [wg-cargo-std-aware#4]
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#14]: Default flags and environment variables**,
  [ehuss], Jul 2019
  - There are additional rustc flags passed to standard library crates which
    could be duplicated initially but not long-term
  - There are suggestions that a config file may be necessary as in
    [wg-cargo-std-aware#13]
  - There is overlap with [wg-cargo-std-aware#28]
  - There is a summary of the differences in flags between bootstrap and
    build-std in
    [wg-cargo-std-aware#14 (comment)][wg-cargo-std-aware#14-review]
- **[Pre-Pre-RFC: making `std`-dependent Cargo features features a first-class
  concept][wg-cargo-std-aware#5-internals]**, [bascule], Aug 2019

>   - API guideslines say that Cargo features should be strictly additive and that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - API guidelines say that Cargo features should be strictly additive and that
```

Author: Fixed

  - [cargo#10308] is a prototype with explicit standard library dependencies
    - Idea posted on internals, see *Build-std and the standard library* below
  - If enabled manually, [cargo#8733] expressed the need to enable build-std
    only for certain targets, in particular when cross-compiling to no-std
    targets
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#46]: How to handle special object files?**, [ehuss], Sep 2019
  - How to handle pre-built object files needed to link on a target?
    - e.g. `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, `crtn.o`, etc for musl or `dllcrt2.o`,
      `crt2.o`, etc for Windows GNU
  - Cargo is target agnostic and does not want to hardcode logic for particular
    targets
    - The target definitions define which files they expect to find and link
      against
  - [rust#68887] adds a `self-contained` directory which could help
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#47]: how to handle pre-built linkers?**, [ehuss], Sep
  2019
  - Some pre-built targets ship with a copy of rust-lld or gcc to assist with
    linking
  - `rust-lld` could be shipped as a rustup component or the user could be
    forced to install these components
    - Since this issue was filed, `rust-lld` is now always shipped

>   - rustc finds `rust-lld` via `--sysroot` and if the sysroot is not provided

Reviewer: Is this true? I think Cargo doesn't normally pass `--sysroot` and rustc finds it itself 

https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/0d6ab209c525e276cbe7544cbd39a3c3619b6b18/compiler/rustc_session/src/config.rs#L2693

Author: I worded this poorly, didn't mean that `--sysroot`, the flag specifically, was used, but rather the location relative to the sysroot was used, and if the sysroot flag were used to disable the sysroot (e.g. `--sysroot=''`) then it couldn't find `rust-lld` either.

  - `rustc-dep-of-std` is a feature that packages used as dependencies of `std` have that,
    when enabled, use to declare explicit dependencies of `core`/`compiler_builtins`/etc
    - May not be necessary once these packages are always declaring dependencies on
      `core`/etc
    - Cargo would still need to work out what to do when seeing explicit dependencies
  - These dependencies could always be built with build-std but that would involve
    using build-std in bootstrap which may not be desirable
  - Alternatively, have some mechanism for telling Cargo that the explicit dependencies
    in this instance aren't from the sysroot but an rlib from bootstrap
    - Could be automatic or variation on patch syntax
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#57]: Support building workspace with separate build-std
  parameters**, [jschwe], Jun 2020
  - User wants to have one package depend on `core` and `alloc` and another
    package depend on `core`, `alloc` and `std` but this isn't possible with the
    current experimental flag
  - Closed as duplicate of [wg-cargo-std-aware#5]
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#68]: Support Profile Guided Optimisation (PGO)**, [errantmind], Mar 2021

>   - `profiler_builtins` isn't compatible with `no_core`

Reviewer: This may have changed in the interim (eg, [`profiler_builtins` is `#![no_core]`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/0d6ab209c525e276cbe7544cbd39a3c3619b6b18/library/profiler_builtins/src/lib.rs#L9)).

Author: Ah, I hadn't spotted that, nice. I haven't changed this line since it reflects what was written on the issue, but have updated it in the prior art summary.

        dependencies in most cases
        - Most packages don't need it
      - Need default for packages that do not specify a standard library
        dependency
  - References to the "portability lint"
    - Lint that triggers when calling an available platform-specific code so
      that users can avoid making code less portable
    - Lint was later deemed infeasible
  - Described as necessary step towards long-standing goal to move from a
    multiple-crates model of the standard library to a cfg-flag model
  - Cargo could learn what targets a package supports
    - e.g. libstd could declare this
    - Doesn't work for custom targets (i.e. target-spec-json)
    - Could accidentally allow the standard library to be used in `no_std`
      projects
    - Adds noise to `Cargo.toml`
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#85]: Figure out rust-lang/rust testing strategy**, [ehuss], Mar 2023
  - How to test build-std when it is tightly coupled to the standard library source tree?
    - Could use rust-toolstate but wasn't very good
    - Could use git subtrees (or [JOSH])
    - Could aim to reduce coupling between the standard library and Cargo

>   - Which targets get tested and how?

Reviewer: "Which targets" has kind of been decided by the Target Tier Policy right?

Author: Yes, I think so. I was just summarizing what had been written in the issues with this section, rather than adding commentary/up-to-date information. I've added a note to mention that - the appendix is just a summary of issues, and then when referenced in the main body of the RFC, will be accompanied with up-to-date information.

  - Initial implementation of `-Zbuild-std`
  - Constructed a synthetic workspace for the standard library and used
    `--extern` to provide the new dependencies to rustc.
  - Required `--target` to be passed so that the host sysroot was used for build
    scripts and procedural macros.
- **[cargo#7336]: Add `alloc` and `proc_macro` to libstd crates**, [alexcrichton], Sep 2019
  - Ensures `alloc` and `proc_macro` are also built when `std` is
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#25]: Remove requirement for `--target`**, [ehuss], Sep 2019
  - `--target` must be specified to require Cargo run in cross-compilation mode (as
    the `proc_macro` crate needs the host sysroot)
  - Fixed in [cargo#14317]
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#27]: Possibly publish a synthetic `Cargo.toml`**, [ehuss], Sep 2019
  - build-std initially had to create a false `Cargo.toml` for the standard library as it
    was part of a workspace with the rest of rust-lang/rust
  - Fixed by [cargo#14358] (after [rust#128534])
- **[wg-cargo-std-aware#28]: Fixup some crate flags**, [ehuss], Sep 2019
  - Some crates require special compiler flags which are scattered throughout bootstrap

>     - e.g. `compiler_builtins` uses `debug-assertions=no`, `codegen-units=1`, `panic=abort`

Reviewer: `codegen-units=1` is true but unfortunately the situation is more complex:

https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/0d6ab209c525e276cbe7544cbd39a3c3619b6b18/library/Cargo.toml#L17-L27

Author: I'll mention this in the previous sections.

- Feature Name: `build-std`
- Start Date: 2025-06-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

While Rust's pre-built standard library has proven itself sufficient for the
majority of Rust uses, there are a handful of use cases that are not well
supported:

> 1. Rebuilding the standard library to match the user's profile

Reviewer 3: or more generally, with target features, even if they don't affect the calling convention. This is noted in the "motivation" section.

Author: Left this as-is, the motivation covers it and I want the summary to remain brief.

`rustc-std-workspace-{core,alloc,std}` are empty crates published on crates.io.
As part of the workspace for the standard library,
`rustc-std-workspace-{core,alloc,std}` are patched with a `path` source to the
directory for the corresponding crate.

Historically, there have necessarily been C dependencies of the standard library,
increasing the complexity of the build environment required. While these have
largely been removed over time - for example, `libbacktrace` previously depended
on `backtrace-sys` but now uses `gimli` ([rust#46439]) - there are still some C
dependencies:

- `libunwind` will either link to the LLVM `libunwind` or the system's
  `libunwind`/`libgcc_s`. LLVM's `libunwind` is shipped as part of the
  rustup component for the standard library and will be linked against
  when `-Clink-self-contained` is used
  - This only applies to Linux and Fuchsia targets
- `compiler_builtins` has an optional `c` feature that will use optimised
  routines from `compiler-rt` when enabled, which is enabled for the pre-built
  standard library
- `compiler_builtins` has an optional `mem` feature that provides symbols
  for common memory routines (e.g. `memcpy`)

>   - It isn't used by when `std` is built as `libc` provides these routines,

Reviewer 3: ... by when ...?
Perhaps `s/by //`,

Author: Fixed, thanks

1. **Re-building the standard library with different codegen flags or profile**
   ([wg-cargo-std-aware#2])
 - Embedded users need to optimise aggressively for size, due to the limited
   space available on their target platforms, which can be achieved in Cargo by
   setting `opt-level = s/z` and `panic = "abort"` in their profile. However,
   these settings will not apply to the pre-built standard library
 - Similarly, when deploying to known environments, use of `target-cpu` or
   `target-feature` can improve the performance of code generation or allow the
   use of newer hardware features than the target's baseline provides. As above,
   these configuration will not apply to the pre-built standard library
 - While the pre-built standard library is built to support debugging without
   compromising size and performance by setting `debuginfo=1`, this isn't
   ideal, and building the standard library with the dev profile would provide
   a better experience
1. **Unblock stabilisation of ABI-modifying compiler flags**
  - Any compiler flags which change the ABI cannot currently be stabilised as they
    would immediately mismatch with the pre-built standard library

>     - Without an ability to rebuild the standard library using these flags, it is

Reviewer 3: `s/ is//`

Author: Fixed

      would be impossible to use them effectively and safely if stabilised
  - ABI-modifying flags are designated as target modifiers ([rfcs#3716]/[rust#136966])
    and require that the same value for the flag is passed to all compilation units
    - Flags which need to be set across the entire crate graph to uphold some
      property (i.e. enhanced security) are also target modifiers
    - For example: sanitizers, control flow integriy, `-Zfixed-x18`, etc
1. **Building the standard library on a stable toolchain without Cargo**
  - While tangential to the core of build-std as a feature, projects like Rust
    for Linux want to be able to build an unmodified `core` from `rust-src` in
    the sysroot on a stable toolchain without Cargo
  - Cargo may also want a mechanism to build the standard library for build-std
    on a stable toolchain without relying on `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`
1. **Building standard library crates that are not shipped for a target**
  - Targets which have limited `std` support may wish to use the subsets of the

>     standard library which do work

Reviewer 3: ~~This is what restricted_std aims to do, isn't it? Does this RFC aim to support that with a stable rustc?~~

Yes, this is made clear below, but perhaps a brief mention of restricted_std here would still be useful.

Author: I won't mention it here because I want to focus just on the use case, not any part of the solution

std: true
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target x86_64-unknown-none
target: x86_64-unknown-none
std: false
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target mipsel-sony-psx
target: mipsel-sony-psx
std: false
alloc: false
core: true
```

On a stable toolchain, if Cargo needs to build one of the standard library
crates for a target, it will check `--print target-standard-library-support` to
determine whether to emit an error.

The existing `restricted_std` mechanism will be removed from the standard
library's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] as it is replaced by this mechanism.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Should target specifications own knowledge of which standard library crates are supported?*][should-target-specifications-own-knowledge-of-which-standard-library-crates-are-supported]
- [*Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?*][why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target]

### Custom targets and target-spec-json
[custom-targets-and-target-spec-json]: #custom-targets-and-target-spec-json

> Cargo will detect when a custom target is being used and

Reviewer 3: `s/ and//`

Author: Fixed

Cargo could detect use of a custom target either by comparing it with the list
of built-in targets that rustc reports knowing about (via `--print target-list`)
or by checking if a file exists at the path matching the provided target name.

Custom targets can still be used with build-std on nightly toolchains.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why disallow custom targets?*][why-disallow-custom-targets]

*Allowing build-std with custom targets on stable toolchains is explored in
[Future possibilities][future-possibilities].*

## Standard library dependencies
[standard-library-dependencies]: #standard-library-dependencies

Every crate now has a implicit dependency on the `std` crate. This implicit
dependency can be removed if a user explicitly writes a dependency on any of the
standard library crates - `core`, `alloc` or `std`.

In the `hello_world` crate below, there is an implicit dependency on `std`..

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
```

..which is equivalent to the following explicit dependency on `std`:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]

> std = { builtin = true } # could be `alloc` or `core` instead

Reviewer 3: If it were `alloc` or `core`, wouldn't it mean something different?

Author: It would, insofar as it would mean you depend on `alloc` instead of `core`, all this is meant to illustrate is that you would write the dependency on `alloc`/`core` with the same syntax. Would appreciate suggestions on how that could be clearer.

Reviewer 3: It confused me because the block is introduced with "... which is equivalent to the following explicit dependency on `std`", but for alloc and core it also requires `#![no_std]` and whatnot in the source (which isn't shown).

Perhaps "there is an implicit dependency on `std`.." (line 439) could use the term "standard library" again.

Reviewer 4: I've removed this comment and tried to make the section flow a bit clearer.

I think saying there's an implicit dependency on the `std` crate is important to understand how Cargo's behaving here

```

`builtin` is a new source of dependency, like crates.io dependencies (with the
`version` key), `path` dependencies or `git` dependencies. `builtin` can only be
set to `true` and cannot be combined with any other dependency source. `builtin`
can only be used with crates named `core`, `alloc` or `std`. crates.io will
accept crates published which have `builtin` dependencies.

*See [Unresolved questions][unresolved-questions] to bikeshed `builtin = true`.*

Cargo already supports `path` and `git` dependencies for crates named `core`,
`alloc` and `std` which continue to be supported and work as before. Multiple

> standard library crates can be added as dependencies.

Reviewer 3: Will it be permitted to mix them?

```
std = { path = "..." }
core = { builtin = true }
```

Author: A good question! I'll need to think about this

Standard library dependencies can be marked as `optional` and be enabled
conditionally by a feature in the crate:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, optional = true }

[features]
default = ["std"]
std = ["dep:std"]
```

On nightly toolchains, it is permitted to patch the standard library
dependencies with `path` and `git` sources (or any other source). As with any
other `path` or `git` dependency, crates with these dependency sources will not
be able to be published to crates.io.

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }

[patch.builtin] # not permitted

> std = { .. }

Reviewer 3: Why not? I can't find an explanation in the surrounding text, but I'm not certain what `..` means here.

Author: This was just an error leftover from previous iterations. `..` was just meant to mean anything a user could write there

[patch.builtin] # permitted
std = { path = "../libstd" }
```

*See [Unresolved questions][unresolved-questions] to bikeshed
`[patch.builtin]`.*

It is not possible to perform source replacement on standard library

> dependencies.

Reviewer 3: Without `builtin = true`, aren't they just normal dependencies? In that case, why won't normal dependency overriding work?

Author: I've clarified that this applies only to `builtin = true`

- [*Why limit enabling standard library features to nightly?*][why-limit-enabling-standard-library-features-to-nightly]

*Enabling and disabling features on explicit standard library dependencies when
using a stable toolchain is explored in
[Future possibilities][future-possibilities].*

### `compiler-builtins-mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtins-mem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) is required by `no_std` crates because `libc` is not
providing these symbols without `std`.

As of [compiler-builtins#411], the relevant symbols have weak linkage and do not
need to be behind a feature flag so these features can be
removed/enabled-by-default.

### Replacing `#![no_std]` as a source-of-truth
[replacing-no_std-as-a-source-of-truth]: #replacing-no_std-as-a-source-of-truth

Crates can currently use the crate attribute `#![no_std]` to indicate a lack of
dependency on the standard library. With `Cargo.toml` being used to express a
dependency on the standard library (or lack thereof), it is unintuitive for

> there to be two sources-of-truth for this information.

Reviewer 3: It removes the dependency on "std", but not "core". Following the terminology declared at the start, this paragraph should probably have "standard library" replaced with "std".

Author: Fixed

`#![no_std]` serves two purposes - it stops the compiler from loading `std` from
the sysroot and adding `extern crate std`, and it prevents the user from
depending on anything from `std` accidentally.

Two new lints will be added to the compiler - `std_use` and `alloc_use`.
`std_use` will trigger if the crate refers to anything from the `std` crate, and

> `alloc_use` similarly for the `alloc` crate. Both lints are allow-by-default.

Reviewer 3: For what it's worth, this seems more intuitive to me than `#![no_std]`, which still confuses me if I think about it from the wrong angle.

Author: I prefer this too, but I don't think it's possible for implementation reasons, at least initially

>   migration guidance.
> - If applicable, describe the differences between teaching this to existing
>   Rust programmers and new Rust programmers.
> - Discuss how this impacts the ability to read, understand, and maintain Rust
>   code. Code is read and modified far more often than written; will the proposed
>   feature make code easier to maintain?
> 
> For implementation-oriented RFCs (e.g. for compiler internals), this section
> should focus on how compiler contributors should think about the change, and
> give examples of its concrete impact. For policy RFCs, this section should
> provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact
> in concrete terms.

**TODO:** write user-facing documentation once we're happy with reference-level

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

This section describes the various changes proposed by this RFC that build-std
would be comprised of.

## Support of the standard library for a target
[support-of-the-standard-library-for-a-target]: #support-of-the-standard-library-for-a-target

A new `standard_library_support` field is added to the target specification,

> replacing the existing `metadata.std`, which has three fields: `core`, `alloc`

Reviewer 4: What does "alloc" mean here? My understanding is any platform without a provided allocator can still be used with the alloc crate if you provide your own allocator/heap.

Given that, the existing bool (which differentiates between just core/alloc or core/alloc/std) seems plenty of information

Author: `alloc` is just the alloc crate, I think it makes sense for this to have three fields as some targets may not support allocators at all and therefore won't support that crate. I think we need three fields - `core` can be false then build-std won't work at all, useful for very experimental targets, and `alloc` can be false for targets without allocation, and `std` for the traditional `no_std` use case. Expanded on this in the document.

Cargo could detect use of a custom target either by comparing it with the list
of built-in targets that rustc reports knowing about (via `--print target-list`)
or by checking if a file exists at the path matching the provided target name.

Custom targets can still be used with build-std on nightly toolchains.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why disallow custom targets?*][why-disallow-custom-targets]

*Allowing build-std with custom targets on stable toolchains is explored in
[Future possibilities][future-possibilities].*

## Standard library dependencies
[standard-library-dependencies]: #standard-library-dependencies

Every crate now has a implicit dependency on the `std` crate. This implicit
dependency can be removed if a user explicitly writes a dependency on any of the
standard library crates - `core`, `alloc` or `std`.

In the `hello_world` crate below, there is an implicit dependency on `std`..

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
```

..which is equivalent to the following explicit dependency on `std`:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]

> std = { builtin = true } # could be `alloc` or `core` instead

Reviewer 4: The fact that you don't need to explicitly declare alloc or core here but the user crate can refer to them (without further changes to rustc to prevent this) seems weird.

Author: I don't think this implies that the user crate can refer to them. If we only pass `--extern std=std.rlib`, then the user won't be able to refer to `alloc::vec::Vec` for example.

Reviewer 4: This is the implied deps section, so for backwards compatibility there should be core and alloc here too.

Author: I don't know what you mean. This example was just intended to show that the implicit dependency was equivalent to writing a dependency on `std` (which implies a dependency on `alloc` and `core`).

The comment I had originally is confusing because it was meant to say "if one were writing this dependency explicitly, they could alternatively write `alloc` or `core` instead to depend on those crates and not `std`" not "the implicit dependency might be `core` or `alloc` instead of `std`" which is a valid reading.

The intent is that whatever the user writes here is what is passed with `--extern` and thus can be used without an `extern crate` line. If that's only `std`, then that works exactly as today (you can write `use std::vec::Vec` and that works, but not `alloc::vec::Vec`, unless you also write `extern crate alloc`). I think that does highlight a problem with what the `--no-implicit-sysroot-deps` section suggests, but I don't know what it means to mention core and alloc here for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 4: The issue is that you cannot depend on `a` in your crate, which depends on `b`, and write `extern crate b` in your crate - Rust throws an error, as it should. You should depend on `b` explicitly.

With `noprelude`, you still need to write `extern crate alloc` to bring in alloc, and same with core (though that's inserted by rustc)

Reviewer 4: Another angle of this - one example in this section is just specifying alloc as the only builtin dependency. This means rustc only receives `--extern alloc` and not std or core. Rustc (currently) inserts `extern crate core;` at the start of the user crate which would give a `can't find crate for core` error.

Presumably not doing `extern crate core` shouldn't be an option as the user would have to define lang items etc themselves (and build-std in this rfc doesn't support no_core), so shouldn't this case be an error?

Reviewer 4: Resolved - builtin dependencies in the manifest should imply direct dependencies on other builtin crates it depends on (i.e. std implies both alloc and core are passed via --extern). clarified this and added a rationale in the document

> ```

Reviewer 4: An unnoted consequence here is that Cargo needs to hardcode the dependencies of the 3 stable crates with several unstable crates that rustc inserts references to and so must be provided via `--extern` like compiler_builtins and the panic crates. The current build-std implementation already does this.

This makes it difficult to change this hierarchy in the future or introduce new crates that the compiler can refer to.

Author: I wasn't sure that this was a consequence. Cargo's current logic for this says that it is a hack until there is a principled way to declare dependencies, so I figured that this proposed principled way would render that hack unnecessary:
https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/00132f31fd8e6d7aa93e00718c2a6addead37e48/src/cargo/core/compiler/standard_lib.rs#L20-L21

Reviewer 4: I think some level of this is needed, for example building panic_unwind and panic_abort if `std` is built and `compiler_builtins` if `core` is built.

Alternatively, have some empty "facade" crates that cargo can use as roots when resolving to represent the 3 requested builtin dependencies, and then have a stage during Unit generation which adds the direct facade crate dependencies as dependencies of every Unit that depends on that facade, which would make things more flexible for the libs team at the cost of some hackery in Cargo.

Reviewer 4: Tested it to confirm but if you remove compiler_builtins from that code section linked then rustc can't find it (currently it brings in the one in the sysroot).

There's 3 types of crates in the std resolve:
1. Stable crates that user crates depend on (std, core, alloc)
2. Unstable crates that user crates depend on (compiler_builtins, plus panic_abort/unwind if std is present)
3. Deps of these crates (unstable due to `-Zforce-unstable-if-unmarked`)

1 are provided explicitly in the toml. 3 are handled for free, user crates don't need to be provided these.
Cargo needs to either infer or be told which crates are 2 in order to add dependencies from user crates to these.

Functionally the libs team could either do something like in my above comment, or cargo can hardcode that `std` means `std` + `panic_abort` + `panic_unwind` and `core` means `core` + `compiler_builtins`. This is probably fine, but it's a commitment that the libs team have to make.

Author: I don't think this is correct from my testing. It could very well be that removing `compiler_builtins` from that code results in current implementation doing something incorrect, but I'm not sure that's salient.

The most important thing here, to my mind, is what rustc requires from Cargo to work. As far as I can tell, that's just `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/std.lib`, `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/alloc.lib` and `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/core.lib` (dropping `std` if not required by the crate and `alloc` likewise).

Assuming we have a crate that depends on `std`, `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/std.lib` is necessary to tell the compiler to load our newly-built std and not load it from the sysroot. Cargo will pass `--extern` for any direct dependencies of a crate in its `Cargo.toml`, `std` is no different (other than the `noprelude` part).

Like any other dependency, dependencies of `std` will be found by rustc from `-L dependency=` paths and eventually the sysroot. If build-std has worked correctly, it finds them all in `-L dependency=` paths, newly-built, rather than the sysroot. That's been a source of bugs in the current implementation, because if it hasn't built something like `panic_abort`, and rustc goes looking for it, it won't find it in the `-L` paths newly-built, but in the sysroot. `panic_abort` in the sysroot would depend on the sysroot's `core` and now we've loaded two `core`s and everything explodes. If build-std is designed and implemented correctly after this RFC, it should always build what the user needs, and so this should never happen, but as a contingency, that's why we propose `--no-implicit-sysroot-deps`, so it will never try and load deps of deps from the sysroot.

Given the above, `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/alloc.lib` and `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/core.lib` aren't strictly necessary, our `std` will depend on them, and rustc would find these in the `-L dependency=` paths.

However, there is one reason to pass these: when a user writes `extern crate $dep`, as far as I can tell, rustc looks for crates already loaded from `--extern` args first, and then searches only the sysroot, not the `-L dependency=` paths. That makes a lot of sense, if I depend on `foo` directly and it depends on `bar`, I shouldn't be able to write `extern crate bar` to load it from the `-L` deps dir, relying on the fact that I know `foo` gives me it transitively.

With a bare rustc invocation, I can write code like `use std::vec::Vec` because an implicit `extern crate std` is added (that's what `no_std` removes), and I can't write `use alloc::vec::Vec` because if loaded from an `-L` path (or `--extern noprelude`) then there's no implicit `extern crate alloc`. However, I can write `extern crate alloc` today and that works totally fine. It loads that crate from the sysroot. So, to keep code working that writes `extern crate alloc` and `extern crate core`, we need to pass `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/alloc.lib` and `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/core.lib`, so that if the user does write that, they're already loaded from these paths, and not from the sysroot. It's possible there are rustc changes we could make here to avoid needing to pass `alloc`/`core` needlessly.

rustc doesn't need `--extern panic_unwind` or `--extern compiler_builtins` or anything like that. If the compiler notices that it is missing these and wants them, then it goes and tries to load them from `-L dependency=`, and then from the sysroot. You can verify this by using `-Zbuild-std` with `--verbose` and for any of the rustc invocations, removing the `--extern compiler_builtins` argument, and passing `--sysroot=''`, so rustc can only load it from `-L dependency=` and it does successfully. If a user writes `extern crate compiler_builtins`, that doesn't work, so we don't need to pass it using `--extern` for the same reasons we do `alloc` or `core`.

I think the above information is the salient part for the purpose of the RFC as it describes the interface between Cargo and rustc, the rest is implementation detail in Cargo, which might be useful to describe but not as important.

I don't know Cargo well, but I can't imagine it would need hardcode information like in the `std_crates` function in the end. I would expect that between the user crates explicitly declaring the standard library crate that they depend on, and the lockfile/`Cargo.toml` of the standard library workspace, Cargo has all the information it needs to work everything out without hardcoding what other crates need compiled when `std` is. That might require some changes to the sysroot crate, but we can do that.

Additionally, as far as I can tell from my reading of the Cargo source, the only dependencies that Cargo would needs to add internally to every unit are the direct dependencies of that unit that will be passed with `--extern`. As long as ultimately `compiler_builtins` is in the unit graph somewhere and is a direct dependency of something (and it will be, as per the standard library crate graph). Unless I'm mistaken, all of that is determiend by what rustc needs from Cargo, so as above, it would only be `std`, `alloc` and `core`, not `compiler_builtins` or `panic_unwind` or anything like that. Therefore, I don't think the "three types of crates" that you describe is accurate - there's the crate that the user has a direct dependency on - probably just `std`, and everything else, just as any other dependency.

Reviewer 4: > You can verify this by using -Zbuild-std with --verbose and for any of the rustc invocations, removing the --extern compiler_builtins argument, and passing --sysroot='', so rustc can only load it from -L dependency=

This is correct and it also works if you just remove compiler_builtins from `std_crates`, I think my experiments were a bit imprecise somehow.

However it seem the panic runtimes are direct deps of user rates - it still breaks if `--extern panic_unwind` (or abort if the profile is abort) is removed from the rustc invocation - I'll reword the text elsewhere to include the panic runtimes when the user specifies "std"

Author: > However, it still breaks if --extern panic_unwind (or abort if the profile is abort) is removed from the rustc invocation - I'll reword the text elsewhere to include the panic runtimes when the user specifies "std"

I didn't find that this was the case.

Reviewer 4: Resolved - panic runtimes do break under this case but rustc should be changed to load them from -L directories.

- If `build-std = "always"`, then the pre-built standard library will be used
  only if it has an identical configuration to the current profile.

When the pre-built standard library is not used or available, Cargo will build
and use the standard library from source with the requested profile. See
[*Vendored `rust-src`*][vendored-rust-src] for how Cargo will get the sources of
the standard library.

Inspired by the concept of [opaque dependencies][Opaque dependencies], the
dependencies of the standard library crates are entirely opaque to the user, who
cannot control compilation any of the dependencies of the `core`, `alloc` or
`std` standard library crates individually.

The lockfile included in the standard library source will be used when resolving
the standard library's dependencies.

The standard library will always be a non-incremental build, with no `depinfo`
produced, and only a `rlib` produced (no `dylib`). It will be built into the
`target` directory of the crate or workspace like any other dependency.

When `std` is a dependency, all of the dependencies of the `sysroot` crate will
be built, ensuring that `proc_macro`, `test` and `profiler_builtins` are also

> built. Optional dependencies of the standard library are not built.

Reviewer 4: profiler_builtins is an optional dependency of sysroot

Author: Good point - we'll need to work out if we want to build this only in some circumstances or all of the time explicitly

`opt-level`, or if the user sets `profile.release.rustflags` that will be
appended to the standard library's release `rustflags`).

Profile overrides in the standard library's workspace continue to apply to its
dependencies. User profile overrides can only apply to the `std`, `alloc` and
`core` crates. 

**TODO:** discuss moving config into profile from bootstrap

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why not always rebuild when the profile changes?*][why-not-always-rebuild-when-the-profile-changes]
- [*Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std`?*][why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std]
- [*Why respect profile overrides of the standard library's workspace?*][why-respect-profile-overrides-of-the-standard-librarys-workspace]

### Preventing implicit sysroot dependencies
[preventing-implicit-sysroot-dependencies]: #preventing-implicit-sysroot-dependencies

Cargo will pass a new `--no-implicit-sysroot-deps` flag to rustc which will
prevent rustc from loading top-level dependencies from the sysroot. For example,
writing `extern crate foo` in a crate will not load `foo.rlib` from the sysroot
if it is present, but if an `--extern noprelude:bar.rlib` is provided which

> depends on a crate `foo`, rustc will look in `-L` paths and the sysroot for it.

Reviewer 4: Why is it necessary for rust to look in the sysroot for deps? For "Special object files", can't the linker bring these in?

Author: The idea behind this part was that when build-std does a rebuild, `std` is provided via `--extern` and the standard library's deps are in the normal `target/deps` directory and found via `-L`, but when using `--extern` with the sysroot `std`, then the deps need to be in the search paths somewhere, so the sysroot still needs to be in the search path. I don't think this is related to the special object files.

Reviewer 4: I was worried about race conditions here a la https://github.com/rust-lang/wg-cargo-std-aware/issues/49, but after thinking about it for a bit I can't think of any scenario that I think would break since your direct dependencies are always explicit

[building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain]: #building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain

rustc will automatically assume `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when the source path of the
crate being compiled is within the same sysroot as the rustc binary being
invoked. Cargo will not need to use `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when compiling the
standard library with a stable toolchain.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why allow building from the sysroot with implied `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`?*][why-allow-building-from-the-sysroot-with-implied-rustc-bootstrap]

### Panic strategies
[panic-strategies]: #panic-strategies-1

Panic strategies are unlike other profile settings insofar as they influence
which crates and flags are passed to the standard library. For example. if
`panic = "unwind"` were set in the Cargo profile then the `panic_unwind` feature
would need to be provided to `std` and `-Cpanic=unwind` passed to suggest that
the compiler use that panic runtime.

If the current crate has no dependency on `std` (i.e. have added an `alloc` or
`core` dependency explicitly to opt-out of the implicit `std` dependency), then

> Cargo will not build either of the `panic_unwind` or `panic_abort` crates or

Reviewer 4: I think it's a valid use case to use these panic implementations in a no_std crate

Reviewer 4: My mistake, all the examples I found were building std (because indeed std chooses the panic runtime to use)

### Caching
[caching]: #caching

Standard library artifacts build by built-std will not be shared between crates
or workspaces, as they only exist in the `target` directory of a specific crate
or workspace.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why not globally cache builds of the standard library?*][why-not-globally-cache-builds-of-the-standard-library]

### Sanitizers
[sanitizers]: #sanitizers

rustc's sanitizer support is currently unstable as it is not possible for users
to re-build the standard library with sanitizer support.

It is out-of-scope for this RFC to propose stabilising sanitizers (see
[rust#123617]) or to expose sanitizer configuration in Cargo, but it is
instructive to examine how build-std would enable sanitizer support to ensure
that the proposed design is compatible.

rustc's flag to enable sanitizers will be a target modifier, as the
instrumentation must be present for all of the crates to avoid false positives.

rustc's sanitizer support attempts to locate sanitizer runtimes in the sysroot
(`$sysroot/lib/rustlib/$target/lib/`) to link against. Rust already ships

> sanitizer runtimes for targets that support sanitizers, so all that is necessary

Reviewer 4: How do these runtimes interact with other target modifiers like CFI?

Reviewer 4: Discussed in person - sanitizers are generally development tools while CFI is mainly useful in shipped binaries, so it seems reasonable to disallow their use together. Other target modifiers exist, and strictly speaking this isn't a build-std issue, but it might be worth making a note that this isn't everything necessary to allow mixing all target modifiers because build-std cannot rebuild all builtin dependencies.

any other dependency.

**TODO:** show example output

[`cargo miri`][cargo-miri] could be re-implemented using build-std to enable a
`miri` profile and always rebuild. The `miri` profile would be configured in the
standard library's workspace, setting the flags/options necessary for `miri`.

[`cargo pkgid`][cargo-pkgid] when passed `-p core` would print `builtin#core` as
the source, likewise with `alloc` and `std`.

[`cargo report`][cargo-report] will not include reports from the standard
library crates or their dependencies.

[`cargo remove`][cargo-remove] will remove `core`, `alloc` or `std` explicitly
from the manifest if invoked with those crate names:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true } # <-- this would be removed
```

[`cargo tree`][cargo-tree] will show `std`, `alloc` and `core` at appropriate
places in the tree of dependencies. `alloc` will always be shown as a dependency
of `std`, and `core` a dependency of `alloc`. As opaque dependencies, none of
the other dependencies of `std`, `alloc` or `core` will be shown. Neither `std`,
`alloc` or `core` will have a version number.

```shell-session

> $ cargo tree

Reviewer 4: I don't think this output is representative - all dependencies would depend on at least core. In addition I believe the vertically first instance of a dependency is expanded and then lower ones are collapsed.

Perhaps clarify implied std dependencies here too.

Author: I think the deduplication that `cargo tree` does would mean that `core` would not need to be a part of the tree for every dep. I think the current example is sufficient to illustrate how this would look.

Reviewer 4: I've expanded this example - I feel it's important to show how much extra output there is as a consequence.

  - While tangential to the core of build-std as a feature, projects like Rust
    for Linux want to be able to build an unmodified `core` from `rust-src` in
    the sysroot on a stable toolchain without Cargo
  - Cargo may also want a mechanism to build the standard library for build-std
    on a stable toolchain without relying on `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`

4. **Building standard library crates that are not shipped for a target**

  - Targets which have limited `std` support may wish to use the subsets of the
    standard library which do work

5. **Using the standard library with tier three targets**

  - There is no stable mechanism for using the standard library on a tier three
    target that does not ship a pre-built std
  - While it is common for these targets to not support the standard library,
    they should be able to use `core`
  - These users are forced to use nightly and the unstable `-Zbuild-std`
    feature or third-party tools like [cargo-xbuild] (formerly [xargo])

6. **Using miri on a stable toolchain**
  - Using miri requires building the standard library with specific compiler flags
    that would not be appropriate for the pre-built standard library, so is forced

>     to require nightly and build its own sysroot

Reviewer 2: Just FYI, Ralf has indicated that if build-std does not support global caching, then they don't want to switch miri to it. This RFC may be a step towards supporting miri, but they may be unwilling to make the switch. There may be other reasons that makes miri integration difficult.

Author: I've mentioned in the "Cargo subcommands" section that build-std may not be sufficient.

target: x86_64-unknown-none
std: false
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target mipsel-sony-psx
target: mipsel-sony-psx
std: false
alloc: false
core: true
```

On a stable toolchain, if Cargo needs to build one of the standard library
crates for a target, it will check `--print target-standard-library-support` to
determine whether to emit an error.

The existing `restricted_std` mechanism will be removed from the standard
library's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] as it is replaced by this mechanism.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Should target specifications own knowledge of which standard library crates are supported?*][should-target-specifications-own-knowledge-of-which-standard-library-crates-are-supported]
- [*Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?*][why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target]

### Custom targets and target-spec-json
[custom-targets-and-target-spec-json]: #custom-targets-and-target-spec-json

Cargo will detect when a custom target is being used and

> to build any of the standard library crates and will emit an error.

Reviewer 2: Emit an error on stable only, right?
That is, it should not emit an error on nightly, possibly with some `-Z` flag?

Reviewer 4: Clarified this and proposed blocking it on `-Zunstable-options`, the logic being that it's certain arguments to `--target` are unstable when combined with build-std

Author: ~~I'm not sure why `-Zunstable-options` is relevant, as that's a rustc flag. I don't think we want to require `-Zunstable-options` in rustc for using custom targets, because we allow that on stable today it would technically be breaking. We *could* argue for that and try to do it, but I didn't originally because I don't think it makes a difference for build-std.~~

I think the desired behaviour here is that if we're on a stable toolchain, build-std is enabled (in the Cargo config), a rebuild of the standard library would be triggered, and a custom target is passed to Cargo's `--target`, then Cargo will emit an error saying that rebuilding the standard library is not supported for custom targets. We could have a unstable feature in Cargo for it to work on nightly, or just allow it, I don't have a preference on that point.

- [*Why rebuild the standard library automatically?*][why-rebuild-the-standard-library-automatically]
- [*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][why-use-the-lockfile-of-the-rust-src-component]

### Profiles
[profiles]: #profiles

Cargo will assume that the pre-built standard library matches the default
release profile. If the user changes the default release profile or builds with
a different profile then depending on the value of `build-std` in the
`.cargo/config`, this could trigger a rebuild. rustc will add a
`--print target-modifiers` flag which will print all of the flags treated as
target modifiers, like `-Zretpoline`, with one flag per line. If changing a
profile setting would result in one of these flags being emitted by Cargo, then
a target modifier has changed and would no longer match the pre-built standard
library.

Standard library crates will be built using the configuration of the current
profile defined in the standard library's workspace. For example, if building in
the release profile, the release profile of the standard library workspace will

> be used. If the profile of the user's crate sets a configuration option, that

Reviewer 3: I'm a little confused about the logic here. Does this still apply with (the default) `build-std = "target-modifiers"`? I would have expected it not to, from reading the section where that was introduced.

Author: I thought this always would apply - what led you to expect it not to?

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, assuming only an "release" `std` is shipped (with no target modifiers), and with `build-std = "target-modifiers"`:

| User profile | User modifiers | Std |
| --- | --- | --- |
| release | none | prebuilt (release) |
| dev | none | prebuilt (release) |
| release | some | custom (release) |
| dev | some | custom (dev) |

Looking back, I wonder if "if building" in this sentence was supposed to mean "if building the standard library", which isn't how I read it. On the other hand, a table of behaviours might be a useful inclusion.

There is an anomaly in that specifying a target modifier triggers a standard library build, which then picks a new profile. I wonder if that will catch people out somehow, but then maybe it's unlikely to matter.

Reviewer 4: The decision to rebuild the standard library if target-modifiers is set should be separate to this decision. The table is accurate but I think it overcomplicates things - Cargo doesn't need to merge profiles if it's using prebuilt std.

I think there's two concepts merged in this paragraph - whether to enable `build-std` if target-modifiers is set and whether to trigger a rebuild or reuse the prebuilt std even if build-std is on.

I've reworded this section a little to make this a bit clearer.

Author: I disagree with that change, I intended the behaviour to be as Jacob's table shows. If you are set to `target-modifiers`, then unless the profiles differ by a target modifier, the pre-built standard library is used, even if you are building in `debug` and the pre-built is `release`.

This was deliberate to avoid the situation where you do a `cargo build`, which defaults to debug, and now immediately need to rebuild the standard library because the profiles mismatch, which was a concern raised with previous build-std RFCs (users don't expect to rebuild the standard library for small changes, like building with the default profile). We're okay today with users doing a debug build and getting a release standard library, so this is no different.

That does have the downside that Jacob mentions..

> There is an anomaly in that specifying a target modifier triggers a standard library build, which then picks a new profile. I wonder if that will catch people out somehow, but then maybe it's unlikely to matter.

..but I think that's okay, because the alternative is rebuilding the standard library for the first debug build of a project, and that's worse.

> I think there's two concepts merged in this paragraph - whether to enable build-std if target-modifiers is set and whether to trigger a rebuild or reuse the prebuilt std even if build-std is on.

I'm not sure what is meant by "whether to enable build-std" here. Setting `build-std` to either `target-modifiers` or `match-profile` *is* enabling build-std, and those options *determine* how rebuilds are triggered, to enable build-std is to choose that.

Reviewer 3: I think this default is reasonable, but I have a nagging doubt that there's a trap here: I don't think there's a way for a user crate to force a `release` build of the standard library whilst also configuring a target modifier. The closest workaround I'm aware of (for normal crates) is a `[profile.dev.package.<name>]` section with `opt-level = 3` and similar, but in this RFC, the standard library build configuration is merged with the user crate configuration (as described under "Profiles"), so the user can't override that without also changing the user crate configuration.

In short, I think it should be possible to explicitly specify which profile the standard library will be built for, otherwise there's no way to explicitly specify the default profile selection if target modifiers are used.

Author: > In short, I think it should be possible to explicitly specify which profile the standard library will be built for, otherwise there's no way to explicitly specify the default profile selection if target modifiers are used.

Well, there is *a* way, if you build with `--release`, then you'll get a release profile standard library with your modified standard library. I also intended that if you overwrote `profile.dev.package.std` with `opt-level=3` then that would work, it would be merged, but there's no real way to merge `opt-level` so the user's setting takes precedence. It is a bit contrived, admittedly, so when `build-std = "target-modifiers"`, it might be nice to have a way to have it always build std in release w/ the target modifier, even if the user's build is in debug.

Reviewer 3: I mean there's no way to explicitly specify a `dev` user crate with a `release` standard library. It's a bit weird, yes, but it's (justifiably) the default behaviour without target modifiers.

Author: That's a fair point. I've adjusted the wording here to clarify the proposal but don't have a good answer for that case specifically yet.

will be merged with the standard library's profile (e.g. if the user sets
`profile.release opt-level` that will override the standard library's release
`opt-level`, or if the user sets `profile.release.rustflags` that will be

> appended to the standard library's release `rustflags`).

Reviewer 3: The exact method of merging should be explained. There are two examples given: one which overrides, and one which appends, but it's not clear what happens to the others. Also note that `rustflags` is currently unstable.

Why would the override not be specified as a normal [dependency override](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html#overrides) (like `profile.dev.std.release`)?

Author: I've added a clarification that the method of merging will depend on the type of the field, lists like rustflags are appended, strings/literals prefer the user's crate.

> Why would the override not be specified as a normal [dependency override](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html#overrides) (like profile.dev.std.release)?

This is what the "profile overrides" below refers to

supported.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not check if `rust-src` has been modified?*][why-not-check-if-rust-src-has-been-modified]
- [*Why vendor standard library dependencies?*][why-vendor-the-standard-librarys-dependencies]
- [*Why not allow the source path for the standard library be customised?*][why-not-allow-the-source-path-for-the-standard-library-be-customised]

### Building the standard library on a stable toolchain
[building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain]: #building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain

rustc will automatically assume `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when the source path of the
crate being compiled is within the same sysroot as the rustc binary being
invoked. Cargo will not need to use `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when compiling the
standard library with a stable toolchain.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why allow building from the sysroot with implied `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`?*][why-allow-building-from-the-sysroot-with-implied-rustc-bootstrap]

### Panic strategies
[panic-strategies]: #panic-strategies-1

Panic strategies are unlike other profile settings insofar as they influence

> which crates and flags are passed to the standard library. For example. if

Reviewer 3: `s/example\./example,/`

Author: Fixed

which need it. These components will contain the special object files normally
included in `rust-std`, and will be distributed for all tiers of targets. While
generally these objects are specific to the architecture and C runtime (CRT)
(and so `rust-self-contained-$arch-$crt` could be sufficient and result in fewer
overall components), it's technically possible that Rust could support two
targets with the same architecture and same CRT but different versions of the
CRT, so having target-specific components is most future-proof. These would
replace the `self-contained` directory in existing `rust-std` components.

As long as these components have been downloaded, as well as any other support
components, such as `rust-mingw`, rustc's `-Clink-self-contained` will be able
to link against the object files and build-std should never fail on account of
missing special object files.

### `compiler-builtins-mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtins-mem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) is required by `no_std` crates because `libc` is not

> providing these symbols without `std`.

Reviewer 3: "does not provide" reads better.

Author: Fixed

It is necessary that the `compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `alloc` and/or
`core` be enabled when `std` is not in the crate graph.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not use weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?*][why-not-use-weak-linkage-for-compiler-builtins-mem-symbols]

### Potential migration breakage
[potential-migration-breakage]: #potential-migration-breakage

When building an existing `no_std` project for a tier three target with
build-std, there could be an implicit dependency on `std` from a dependency
`no_std` crate that has not yet made its dependency on only the `core` crate
explicit, for example. In this circumstance, this would fail to build as the
target will have had `standard_library_support.std = false` in its target
specification and Cargo will refuse to build `std` (see
[*Support of the standard library for a target*][support-of-the-standard-library-for-a-target]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why permit breakage of nightly build-std users using tier three targets?*][why-permit-breakage-of-nightly-build-std-users-using-tier-three-targets]

### Caching
[caching]: #caching

> Standard library artifacts build by built-std will not be shared between crates

Reviewer 3: `s/build by built/built by build/`

Author: Fixed

any other dependency.

**TODO:** show example output

[`cargo miri`][cargo-miri] could be re-implemented using build-std to enable a
`miri` profile and always rebuild. The `miri` profile would be configured in the
standard library's workspace, setting the flags/options necessary for `miri`.

[`cargo pkgid`][cargo-pkgid] when passed `-p core` would print `builtin#core` as
the source, likewise with `alloc` and `std`.

[`cargo report`][cargo-report] will not include reports from the standard
library crates or their dependencies.

[`cargo remove`][cargo-remove] will remove `core`, `alloc` or `std` explicitly
from the manifest if invoked with those crate names:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true } # <-- this would be removed
```

[`cargo tree`][cargo-tree] will show `std`, `alloc` and `core` at appropriate
places in the tree of dependencies. `alloc` will always be shown as a dependency
of `std`, and `core` a dependency of `alloc`. As opaque dependencies, none of
the other dependencies of `std`, `alloc` or `core` will be shown. Neither `std`,

> `alloc` or `core` will have a version number.

Reviewer 3: Have you thought about what tools like `cargo-about` or `cargo-deny` might do? They're custom commands, and probably out of scope here, but perhaps this proposal helps with their similar problems (e.g. EmbarkStudios/cargo-about#16).

Author: I haven't, will make a note to do so

- [`cargo check`][cargo-check]
- [`cargo clippy`][cargo-clippy]
- [`cargo doc`][cargo-doc]
- [`cargo fix`][cargo-fix]
- [`cargo run`][cargo-run]
- [`cargo rustc`][cargo-rustc]
- [`cargo rustdoc`][cargo-rustdoc]
- [`cargo test`][cargo-test]

build-std has no implications for the following Cargo subcommands:

- [`cargo fmt`][cargo-fmt]
- [`cargo generate-lockfile`][cargo-generate-lockfile]
- [`cargo help`][cargo-help]
- [`cargo init`][cargo-init]
- [`cargo install`][cargo-install]
- [`cargo locate-project`][cargo-locate-project]
- [`cargo login`][cargo-login]
- [`cargo logout`][cargo-logout]
- [`cargo new`][cargo-new]
- [`cargo owner`][cargo-owner]
- [`cargo package`][cargo-package]
- [`cargo publish`][cargo-publish]
- [`cargo search`][cargo-search]
- [`cargo uninstall`][cargo-uninstall]
- [`cargo version`][cargo-version]
- [`cargo yank`][cargo-yank]

## Public and private dependencies
[public-and-private-dependencies]: #public-and-private-dependencies

Implicit dependencies on the standard library default to being public
dependencies. When a standard library is explicitly written, then it will be
private by default, like any other written dependency, unless explicitly marked

> as public.

Reviewer 3: There perhaps ought to be a rationale section for why explicit standard library dependencies should be private by default. I worry that exposing a `Vec<_>` or `impl Iterator<..>` in the public API would [trigger a warning](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/lints/listing/warn-by-default.html#exported-private-dependencies), which is excessively noisy when all (non-opaque) packages are using the same standard library anyway.

Author: Added a rationale for this

[why-not-do-nothing]: #why-not-do-nothing

Support for rebuilding the standard library is a long-standing feature request
from subsets of the Rust community and blocks the work of some project teams
(e.g. sanitisers and branch protection in the compiler team, amongst others).
Inaction forces these users to remain on nightly and depend on the unstable
`-Zbuild-std` flag indefinitely. RFCs and discussion dating back to the first
stable release of the language demonstrate the longevitity of build-std as a
need.

## Shouldn't build-std be part of rustup?
[shouldnt-build-std-be-part-of-rustup]: #shouldnt-build-std-be-part-of-rustup

build-std is effectively creating a new sysroot with a customised standard
library[^2]. rustup as Rust's toolchain manager has lots of existing machinery
to create and maintain sysroots. rustup knows how to download `rust-src`, it
knows how to create a new toolchain from an existing sysroot (as in
`rustup toolchain link`), it would only need to learn how to invoke Cargo on the
`rust-src` sources. rustup would be invoking tools from the next layer of
abstraction (Cargo) in the same way that Cargo invokes tools from the layer of
abstraction after it (rustc).

> A brief prototype of this idea was created and

Reviewer 3: `s/and/and a/`

Author: Fixed

`version = "*"` would be understood by older versions of Cargo, it would attempt
to find the standard library crates on crates.io and fail. This is not a
build-std specific issue and is true of any RFC adding to what can be written in
`Cargo.toml`.

## Why not use weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?
[why-not-use-weak-linkage-for-compiler-builtins-mem-symbols]: #why-not-use-weak-linkage-for-compiler-builtinsmem-symbols

Since [compiler-builtins#411], the relevant symbols in `compiler_builtins`
already have weak linkage. However, it is nevertheless not possible to simply
remove the `mem` feature and have the symbols always be present.

Some targets, such as those based on MinGW, do not have sufficient support for
weak definitions (at least with the default linker). Furthermore, weak linkage
has precedence over shared libraries and the symbols of a dynamically-linked
`libc` should be preferred over `compiler_builtins`'s symbols.

## Why permit patching of the standard library dependencies on nightly?
[why-permit-patching-of-the-standard-library-dependencies-on-nightly]: #why-permit-patching-of-the-standard-library-dependencies-on-nightly

> Being able to patching standard library dependencies and replace their source

Reviewer 3: `s/patching/patch/`

Author: Fixed

with a `path` dependency is required to be able to replace `rustc_dep_of_std`.
As crates which use these sources cannot be published to crates.io, this would
not enable a usable general-purpose mechanism for crates to modify the standard
library sources. This capability is restricted to nightly as that is all that is
required for it to be used in replacing `rustc_dep_of_std`.

## Why limit enabling standard library features to nightly?
[why-limit-enabling-standard-library-features-to-nightly]: #why-limit-enabling-standard-library-features-to-nightly

## Why prevent rustc from loading root dependencies from the sysroot?
[why-prevent-rustc-from-loading-root-dependencies-from-the-sysroot]: #why-prevent-rustc-from-loading-root-dependencies-from-the-sysroot

When standard library dependencies are explicitly passed to rustc, there is no

> need to load root dependencies from the sysroot, which could be a source of bugs.

Reviewer 3: This reads the wrong way around, to my mind. The way it is worded leaves some doubt: what happens when dependencies are not explicitly passed to rustc?

I think the answer to the question is simply: "Loading root dependencies from the system could be a source of bugs, ..." followed by "and is unnecessary because standard library dependencies are passed explicitly to rustc."

Author: Reworded, thanks

If `build-std = "always"` were the default, the standard library could be
rebuilt quite frequently without much benefit. Especially as the pre-built
standard library is built using the release profile, all debug profile builds
would immediately trigger a rebuild of the standard library.

See
[*Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std?*][why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std]
and
[*Why rebuild the standard library automatically?*][why-rebuild-the-standard-library-automatically]

## Why vendor the standard library's dependencies?
[why-vendor-the-standard-librarys-dependencies]: #why-vendor-the-standard-librarys-dependencies

Vendoring the standard library's dependencies has multiple advantages..

- Avoid needing to support standard library dependencies in `cargo vendor`
- Avoid needing to support standard library dependencies in `cargo fetch`
- Re-building the standard library does not require an internet connection
- Standard library dependency versions are fixed to those in the `Cargo.lock`
  anyway, so the same versions would be being downloaded every time if not
  vendored

..and few disadvantages:

- A larger `rust-src` component takes up more disk space and takes longer to

>   download

Reviewer 3: I think this is true only if build-std is not used. If we're rebuilding the standard library, it doesn't matter much whether the dependencies are vendored with it, or if we have to fetch them.

Author: Added a mention of this

> - Vendored dependencies can't be updated with the latest security fixes

Reviewer 3: This is true for crates in general, but since the standard library is always built with a `Cargo.lock`, then does it make much difference here?

Author: It doesn't, noted this

See
[*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][why-use-the-lockfile-of-the-rust-src-component]

## Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std`?
[why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std]: #why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std

As the default configuration for `build-std` is `target-modifiers`, debug builds
of the user's crate would not trigger a rebuild of the standard library and
would use the pre-built standard library. It would only be when
`build-std = "always"` that any debug build would first trigger a rebuild of the

> standard library.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't actually answer "why", but just hints at it. It could perhaps conclude with a statement like: "Since this is not the default, a pre-built debug library would not be used most of the them."

There's also an additional complication, I think: if two pre-built libraries are provided with different profiles, wouldn't there be an expectation that the profiles match the user build? It'd be weird to pick a release `std` in a `dev` build when a `dev` library is available. However, aligning that might be disruptive, not least because a debug `std` could be rather large. Not shipping a debug profile avoids (or at least postpones) any related decisions.

Author: > This doesn't actually answer "why", but just hints at it.

Made this more explicit

> There's also an additional complication, I think: if two pre-built libraries are provided with different profiles, wouldn't there be an expectation that the profiles match the user build? It'd be weird to pick a release std in a dev build when a dev library is available. However, aligning that might be disruptive, not least because a debug std could be rather large. Not shipping a debug profile avoids (or at least postpones) any related decisions.

Added a brief mention of this complexity

- Feature Name: `build-std`
- Start Date: 2025-06-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

While Rust's pre-built standard library has proven itself sufficient for the
majority of Rust uses, there are a handful of use cases that are not well
supported:

1. Rebuilding the standard library to match the user's profile
2. Rebuilding the standard library with ABI-modifying flags
3. Building the standard library for tier three targets

This RFC proposes a handful of changes to Cargo, the compiler and standard
library with the goal of defining a minimal build-std that has the potential of
being stabilised:

> - Retiring `#![no_std]`

Reviewer 2: Per the discussion in the meeting, I believe this line about `#![no_std]` needs to be removed.

Each target will set `core`, `alloc` and `std` as appropriate. For example, all
three standard library crates will be stable on "aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu",
only `alloc` and `core` will be stable on "x86_64-unknown-none" and only `core`
will be stable on "mipsel-sony-psx".

The `target-standard-library-support` option will be supported by `rustc`'s
`--print` flag:

```shell-session
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support
target: aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu
std: true
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target x86_64-unknown-none
target: x86_64-unknown-none
std: false
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target mipsel-sony-psx
target: mipsel-sony-psx
std: false
alloc: false
core: true
```

On a stable toolchain, if Cargo needs to build one of the standard library
crates for a target, it will check `--print target-standard-library-support` to
determine whether to emit an error.

The existing `restricted_std` mechanism will be removed from the standard
library's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] as it is replaced by this mechanism.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

> - [*Why record support for `core`, `alloc` and `std` separately?*][why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-seperately]]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [*Why record support for `core`, `alloc` and `std` separately?*][why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-separately]
```

Author: Fixed

- [*Should target specifications own knowledge of which standard library crates are supported?*][should-target-specifications-own-knowledge-of-which-standard-library-crates-are-supported]
- [*Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?*][why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target]

### Custom targets and target-spec-json
[custom-targets-and-target-spec-json]: #custom-targets-and-target-spec-json

Cargo will detect when the standard library is to be built for a custom target

> and will emit an error.

Reviewer 2: This is for stable only, right?
That is, it should be allowed on nightly (possibly with some `-Z` flag), correct?

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, optional = true }

[features]
default = ["std"]
std = ["dep:std"]
```

If there is an optional dependency on the standard library then there must be at
least one non-optional dependency on the standard library (e.g. an optional
`std` and non-optional `core` or `alloc`, or an optional `alloc` and
non-optional `core`). `core` cannot be optional.

On nightly toolchains, it is permitted to patch the standard library
dependencies with `path` and `git` sources (or any other source). As with any
other `path` or `git` dependency, crates with these dependency sources will not
be able to be published to crates.io.

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { .. }

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { path = "../libstd" }
```

*See [Unresolved questions][unresolved-questions] to bikeshed
`[patch.builtin]`.*

It is not possible to perform source replacement on standard library
dependencies using `builtin = true`.

> Implicit and explicit standard library dependencies are not added to

Reviewer 2: I think avoiding `Cargo.lock` will be complicated, and may not be feasible.

When cargo builds the dependency graph, it is driven by the index (not `Cargo.toml`). That means these builtin dependencies will need to be included in the index (which should be mentioned somewhere, since that itself can be a tricky topic). The way cargo works is that serialization/deserialization of the resolve is directly equivalent to `Cargo.lock`, and that needs to be a two-way non-lossy process.

Author: Avoiding `Cargo.lock` was only there because I naively thought it wouldn't be required. I don't know much about the index, could you elaborate a bit on what would be necessary there? Added a TODO for it for now.

Reviewer 2: I'm not 100% certain because I have never added a new source kind before.

I think the general outline is that we would need to change the `"deps"` type described in [JSON schema](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/registry-index.html#json-schema). The index currently assumes that all dependencies come from registries. So I'm not quite sure how to model this. If we go this route, then I think the `"v"` field will need to be bumped due to schema change.

Implementation-wise I think there is a bunch of plumbing that would be affected, including the resolver. One of the starting points is adding a new [`SourceKind`](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/409fed7dc1553d49cb9a8c0637d12d65571346ce/crates/cargo-util-schemas/src/core/source_kind.rs#L5) variant, and then dealing with all the fallout from that.

I don't know how difficult this is going to be, but I worry it's going to be challenging.

All registries like crates.io would be affected, since they would need to store this in the index.

So I think a high-level summary is:
* Cargo would add a new source kind that represents a standard library crate.
* The registry index structure will need to be updated in some way to record these standard library dependencies.
* The `v` field of the index will be increased to indicate the schema change.
* Registries will need to be updated to record and understand this new dependency kind.
* The standard library dependencies will show up in `Cargo.lock` and will generally appear like a normal dependency.

Author: Thanks for this - a lot to dig into!

Reviewer 4: I've written about this in Cargo API changes. I think we can put builtin deps in the schema without creating a new version of it.

I'm a bit concerned about builtin package names needing to shadow crates of the same name in the registry, but hopefully cargo can avoid that fact leaking too far given that these packages would have a different sourcekind.

If the cargo team is a bit concerned about the complexity here perhaps a prototype of the Cargo changes would be useful down the road

knows how to create a new toolchain from an existing sysroot (as in
`rustup toolchain link`), it would only need to learn how to invoke Cargo on the
`rust-src` sources. rustup would be invoking tools from the next layer of
abstraction (Cargo) in the same way that Cargo invokes tools from the layer of
abstraction after it (rustc).

A brief prototype of this idea was created and a
[short design document was drafted][why-not-rustup] before concluding that it
would not be possible. With artifact dependencies, it may be desirable to build
with a different standard library and if rustup was creating different
toolchains per-customised standard library then Cargo would need to have
knowledge of these to switch between them, which isn't possible (and something
of a layering violation). It is also unclear how Cargo would find and use the
uncustomised host sysroot for build scripts and procedural macros.

[^2]: While `--extern` is used in today's unstable implementation, this is largely
for convenience, creating a new sysroot and using it with `--sysroot` is
equivalent.

## Why record support for `core`, `alloc` and `std` separately?

> [why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-seperately]: #why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-seperately

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-separately]: #why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-separately
```

Author: Fixed

- Feature Name: `build-std`
- Start Date: 2025-06-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

While Rust's pre-built standard library has proven itself sufficient for the
majority of Rust uses, there are a handful of use cases that are not well
supported:

1. Rebuilding the standard library to match the user's profile
2. Rebuilding the standard library with ABI-modifying flags
3. Building the standard library for tier three targets

This RFC proposes a handful of changes to Cargo, the compiler and standard
library with the goal of defining a minimal build-std that has the potential of
being stabilised:

> - Retiring `#![no_std]`

Author: This line is out-of-date and should be removed

As long as these components have been downloaded, as well as any other support
components, such as `rust-mingw`, rustc's `-Clink-self-contained` will be able
to link against the object files and build-std should never fail on account of
missing special object files.

*Possibilities for rebuilding special object files locally are explored in
[Future possibilities][future-possibilities].*

### `compiler-builtins-mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtins-mem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) is required by `no_std` crates because `libc` does not
provide these symbols without `std`.

It is necessary that the `compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `alloc` and/or
`core` be enabled when `std` is not in the crate graph.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not use weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?*][why-not-use-weak-linkage-for-compiler-builtins-mem-symbols]

### Potential migration breakage
[potential-migration-breakage]: #potential-migration-breakage

> When building an existing `no_std` project for a tier two or three target with

Reviewer 4: This failure can by avoided by having the implicit standard library dependencies be inferred from what's listed in the target-spec for that target, which Cargo is fetching early anyway.

Author: This seems like making the specific crate of the implicit dependency depend on the crate sources/target-spec, which I wasn't keen on.

Reviewer 4: Fair enough - this could be encoded in the registry index technically, but would require that crate support doesn't change between toolchain versions

could change during implementation and are present solely to demonstrate that
the implementation feasibility has been considered and to provide an example of
how implementation could proceed.

> [!NOTE]
>
> This is an example of a "note alert" that will be used to separate
> implementation detail from the proposal proper.

# Background
[background]: #background

See [*Implementation summary*][implementation-summary] for a summary of the
current unstable build-std feature in Cargo. This section aims to introduce any
relevant details about the standard library and compiler that are assumed
knowledge by referenced sources and later sections.

## Standard library
[background-standard-library]: #standard-library

Since the first stable release of Rust, the standard library has been distributed
as a pre-built artifact via rustup, which has a variety of advantages and/or
rationale:

- It saves Rust users from having to rebuild the standard library whenever they
  start a project or do a clean build
- The standard library has and has had dependencies which require a more complicated
  build environment than typical Rust projects

>   - e.g. requiring a working C toolchain to build `compiler-builtins`' `c` feature

Author: We don't yet go on to explain what we propose to do with `compiler-builtins/c`. We should describe what we'd like to do with this feature - not enabling it is the easiest option and will always work but is a divergence compared to the pre-built std. Could we detect when we have the required C toolchain in compiler-builtins' `build.rs` and get closer to the pre-built std most of the time?

Reviewer 4: I think so. Would involve shipping compiler-rt, which may be fine considering we already ship libunwind (which I don't think is needed any more)

> builds ensure that each tier 2 target can be used as build target after each
> change.

..and finally, tier one targets:

> The Rust project builds official binary releases for each tier 1 target, and
> automated testing ensures that each tier 1 target builds and passes tests
> after each change.

All of the standard library crates leverage permanently unstable features
provided by the compiler that will never be stabilised and therefore require
nightly to build.

The configuration for the pre-built standard library build is spread across
bootstrap, the standard library workspace, individual standard library crate
manifests and the target specification. The pre-built standard library is
installed into the sysroot.

At the beginning of compilation, unless the crate has the `#![no_std]`
attribute, the compiler will load the `libstd.rlib` file from the sysroot as a
dependency of the current crate and add an implicit `extern crate std` for it.
This is the mechanism by which every crate has an implicit dependency on the
standard library.

The standard library sources are distributed in the `rust-src` component by

> rustup and placed in the sysroot under `lib/rustlib/src/`.

Author: Could be worth mentioning any other sources included or not included in this - e.g. no vendored deps, libunwind sources, etc.

Reviewer 4: For now I've included libunwind but after a little digging I'm not sure it's required any more.

The `std` crate's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] checks for supported values of the
`CARGO_CFG_TARGET_*` environment variables. These variables are akin to the
conditional compilation [configuration options][conditional-compilation-config-options],
and often correspond to parts of the target triple (for example,
`CARGO_CFG_TARGET_OS` corresponds to the "os" part of a target triple - "linux"
in "aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu"). This filtering is strict enough to distinguish
between built-in targets but loose enough to match similar custom targets.

When encountering an unknown or unsupported operating system then the
`restricted_std` cfg is set. `restricted_std` marks the entire standard library
as unstable, requiring `feature(restricted_std)` to be enabled on any crate that
depends on it. There is no mechanism for users to enable the `restricted_std`
feature on behalf of dependencies. There is also no such mechanism for `alloc`
or `core`, only `std`.

Cargo and rustc support custom targets, defined in JSON files according to an
unstable schema defined in the compiler. On nightly, users can dump the
target-spec-json for an existing target using `--print target-spec-json`, which

> can be saved in a file, tweaked and used as the argument to `--target`. Custom

Author: Clarify that while nightly is required for `--print target-spec-json`, it isn't to use the target spec (more-or-less).

([?][rationale-target-spec-purpose]), replacing the existing `metadata.std`,
which has three fields: `core`, `alloc` and `std`
([?][rationale-target-spec-core-alloc-std]). These fields determine whether the
corresponding crate is supported for that target. On a stable toolchain,
build-std will emit an error if it required to build a crate which is not
supported by a given target.

Each target will set `core`, `alloc` and `std` as appropriate. For example, all
three standard library crates will be stable on "aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu",
only `alloc` and `core` will be stable on "x86_64-unknown-none" and only `core`
will be stable on "mipsel-sony-psx".

The `target-standard-library-support` option will be supported by `rustc`'s
`--print` flag:

```shell-session
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support
target: aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu
std: true
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target x86_64-unknown-none
target: x86_64-unknown-none
std: false
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target mipsel-sony-psx
target: mipsel-sony-psx
std: false
alloc: false
core: true
```

> On a stable toolchain, if Cargo needs to build one of the standard library

Author: This feels like an implementation detail but we're also introducing `--print target-standard-library-support` in this RFC to support this. We should mention this flag in the Appendix I.

determine whether to emit an error.

The existing `restricted_std` mechanism will be removed from the standard
library's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] as it is replaced by this mechanism
([?][rationale-replace-restricted-std]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Should target specifications own knowledge of which standard library crates are supported?*][rationale-target-spec-purpose]
- [*Why record support for `core`, `alloc` and `std` separately?*][rationale-target-spec-core-alloc-std]
- [*Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?*][rationale-replace-restricted-std]

### Custom targets
[custom-targets]: #custom-targets

Cargo will detect when the standard library is to be built for a custom target
and will emit an error ([?][rationale-disallow-custom-targets]).

> [!NOTE]
> 
> Cargo could detect use of a custom target either by comparing it with the list
> of built-in targets that rustc reports knowing about (via `--print target-list`)
> or by checking if a file exists at the path matching the provided target name.

Custom targets can still be used with build-std on nightly toolchains provided

> that `-Zunstable-options` is provided.

Author: ```suggestion
that `-Zunstable-options` is provided to Cargo.
```

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why disallow custom targets?*][rationale-disallow-custom-targets]

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Allow custom targets with build-std*][future-custom-targets]

## Standard library dependencies
[standard-library-dependencies]: #standard-library-dependencies

Users can now optionally declare explicit dependencies on the standard library
in their `Cargo.toml` files ([?][rationale-why-explicit-deps]):

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }
```

`builtin` is a new source of dependency, like crates.io dependencies (with the
`version` key), `path` dependencies or `git` dependencies. `builtin` can only be
set to `true` and cannot be combined with any other dependency source for a
given dependency ([?][rationale-builtin-other-sources]). `builtin` can only be
used with crates named `core`, `alloc` or `std`
([?][rationale-no-builtin-other-crates]):

```toml
[dependencies]
alloc = { builtin = true }
```

```toml
[dependencies]
core = { builtin = true }

> ```

Author: Introduce these examples more.

> crates.io will accept crates published which have `builtin` dependencies.

Author: In the background section, we should note that crates w/ non-`version` sources can't be published to crates.io.

> Crates without an explicit dependency on the standard library now has a implicit

Author: ```suggestion
Crates without an explicit dependency on the standard library now have an implicit
```

dependency on the `std` crate ([?][rationale-no-migration]). In the
`hello_world` crate below, there is an implicit dependency on `std`..

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
```

..which is equivalent to the following explicit dependency on `std`:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }
```

Any `builtin` dependency present in the manifest will disable the implicit
dependency on `std`. Multiple standard library crates can be added as
dependencies:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }
core = { builtin = true }
```

> Standard library dependencies cannot be renamed.

Author: An example and justification for this would be worthwhile.

> Implicit and explicit standard library dependencies are added to `Cargo.lock`

Author: Need an example of what this looks like in the `Cargo.lock`.

Reviewer 4: This requires some implementation work to figure out fully I think. It'll look similar to the following:

```
[[package]]
name = "std"
version = "0.0.0"
source = "builtin+builtin"
```

No dependencies or checksum keys (both are optional).

`source` expects a URL and I think it needs a scheme and a hostname - maybe this can be hacked around a little if needed. It will need a version bump and I've added that to the document

Reviewer 4: To be a bit more correct, I think we could fit builtin dependencies into the same lockfile version by giving them their own key: they'd be under `[[builtin-package]]` and regular packages would gain a `builtin_dependencies` key - the lockfile parsing ignores unknown fields, similar to how the registry index does. However, since this is more user-facing the ugliness here isn't great.

The cost of a lockfile version bump is that it slows stabilisation (not that we'd be rushing this into stable I imagine) and that adding builtin dependencies raises the "minimum cargo version" - which builtins in the Cargo.toml file would do anyway.

Reviewer 4: No point worrying about a lockfile version bump given that a new Cargo version is required to parse the `builtin` format anyway

- [*Why disallow builtin dependencies to be combined with other sources?*][rationale-builtin-other-sources]
- [*Why disallow builtin dependencies on other crates?*][rationale-no-builtin-other-crates]
- [*Why not migrate to always requiring explicit standard library dependencies?*][rationale-no-migration]
- [*Why add standard library dependencies to Cargo.lock?*][rationale-cargo-lock]
- [*Why add standard library crates to Cargo's index?*][rationale-cargo-index]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*What syntax is used to identify dependencies on the standard library in `Cargo.toml`?*][unresolved-dep-syntax]

## Non-`builtin` standard library dependencies
[non-builtin-standard-library-dependencies]: #non-builtin-standard-library-dependencies

Cargo already supports `path` and `git` dependencies for crates named `core`,
`alloc` and `std` which continue to be supported and work:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { path = "../my_std" } # already supported by Cargo
```

`path`/`git` dependencies for `core`/`alloc`/`std` can be combined with

> `builtin` dependencies:

Author: Clarify that you can have both but not together in the same dependency - I do mention this above but worth repeating here.

core = { builtin = true }
```

As before, crates with `path`/`git` dependencies for `core`, `alloc` or `std`
are not accepted by crates.io.

Standard library dependencies can be marked as `optional` and be enabled
conditionally by a feature in the crate:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, optional = true }
core = { builtin = true }

[features]
default = ["std"]
std = ["dep:std"]
```

If there is an optional dependency on the standard library then there must be at
least one non-optional dependency on the standard library (e.g. an optional
`std` and non-optional `core` or `alloc`, or an optional `alloc` and
non-optional `core`). `core` cannot be optional.

### Patches
[patches]: #patches

On nightly toolchains, it is permitted to patch the standard library
dependencies with `path` and `git` sources (or any other source)
([?][rationale-patching]):

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { .. }

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { path = "../libstd" }
```

> As with any other `path` or `git` dependency, crates with these dependency

Author: Needs justification.

Reviewer 4: quoted the crates.io policy of not allowing crate sources that aren't on that same registry here

sources will not be able to be published to crates.io.

It is not possible to perform source replacement on standard library

> dependencies using `builtin = true`.

Author: It's probably worth explaining what source replacement is somewhere (in the background?) and justifying why we don't allow it.

- [*Why permit patching of the standard library dependencies on nightly?*][rationale-patching]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*What syntax is used to patch dependencies on the standard library in `Cargo.toml`?*][unresolved-patch-syntax]

### Features
[features]: #features-1

On a stable toolchain, it is not permitted to enable or disable features of
explicit standard library dependencies ([?][rationale-features]), as in the
below example:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, features = [ "foo" ] } # not permitted
# ..or..
std = { builtin = true, default-features = false } # not permitted
```

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why limit enabling standard library features to nightly?*][why-limit-enabling-standard-library-features-to-nightly]

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Allow enabling/disabling features with build-std*][future-features]

### Public and private dependencies
[public-and-private-dependencies]: #public-and-private-dependencies

Implicit dependencies on the standard library default to being public

> dependencies ([?][rationale-implicit-public]). When a standard library is

Author: Public/private deps might warrant a background section being relatively new and/or unstable (?).

explicitly written, then it will be private by default, like any other written
dependency, unless explicitly marked as public ([?][rationale-explicit-private]).

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
```

..is equivalent to the following explicit dependency on `std`:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, public = true }
```

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why default to public for the implicit standard library dependencies?*][rationale-implicit-public]
- [*Why follow the default privacy of explicit standard library dependencies?*][rationale-explicit-private]

### `rustc_dep_of_std`
[rustc_dep_of_std]: #rustc_dep_of_std

With first-class explicit dependencies on the standard library,
`rustc_dep_of_std` is rendered unnecessary and explicit dependencies on the
standard library can always be present in the `Cargo.toml` of the standard
library's dependencies.

The `core`, `alloc` and `std` dependencies can be patched in the standard

> library's workspace to point to the local copy of the crates.

Author: Maybe explain why this is worth doing?

Reviewer 4: Mentioned that crates.io crates do not need to add support for rustc_dep_of_std before std can depend on them

### `dev-dependencies` and `build-dependencies`
[dev-dependencies-and-build-dependencies]: #dev-dependencies-and-build-dependencies

There is no implicit dependency on the standard library in `build-dependencies`
and explicit dependencies on the standard library are not supported
([?][rationale-no-deps-in-build-deps]).

Implicit and explicit dependencies on the standard library are supported for
`dev-dependencies` in the same way as regular `dependencies`. An additional
implicit dependency on the `test` crate is added for `dev-dependencies`.

> `test = { builtin = true }` can also be written explicitly.

Author: Permit `test` optionally in the regular dependencies?

Reviewer 4: There's usecases for writing "extern crate test" such as writing your own test harness, but I think explicit deps on test should be restricted to nightly as the test crate is unstable.

Reviewer 2: Just to trim scope, I would suggest not allowing `test` at all, but instead just handle it implicitly. If someone wants to access nightly test features (like benchmarks), they can still continue to use `extern crate test;`.

I'm also not entirely clear on the "implicit dependency on the `test` crate part". I don't think there should be a implicit dependency in all cases for dev-dependencies. For example, some projects could have example crates which are not intended to link with test (and may not be possible for targets that don't support std/test).

The [current implementation](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/e4162389d67c603d25ba6e25b0e9423fcb8daa64/src/cargo/core/compiler/standard_lib.rs#L31-L38) implicitly adds the `test` crate if you are building a test with the default harness. This allows rustc to find the test crate from the [`extern crate test;` that the `#[test]` attribute injects](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ce9c977ffcff7c3b12bfe5629a682da0e74a7a1/compiler/rustc_builtin_macros/src/test.rs#L379-L381). Without the `--extern test=...`, I don't think rustc will be able to find it correctly. My hunch is that it should continue to behave this way (which is unfortunate, since cargo needs to hard-code that).

Reviewer 4: From [this search](https://github.com/search?q=%22extern+crate+test%22&type=code&p=2) there's lots of users that write `extern crate test` manually and not gate it on `#[cfg(test)]`. For example, building [this](https://github.com/steinathan/colon/blob/master/src/zip.rs) crate with just `cargo +nightly b -Zbuild-std` gives a duplicate lang item in `std` (and will give a crate not found error with this RFC due to `--no-implicit-sysroot-deps`).

To write this users have to opt into instability via `#![feature(test)]`, but my worry is that there's no way to express this dependency in the RFC currently and it doesn't work implicitly. It would be very confusing if Cargo inferred that `build-std` was on and then you get this error in dev/release but not test. I think at minimum the restriction the names of builtin deps should be relaxed on nightly.

Reviewer 4: I wrote about Cargo injecting the test crate where needed, which requires making the test crate name stable. I also specify that any builtin crate name should be valid on nightly (with the appropriate `cargo-features`)

(typically in `~/.config/cargo`), the value of `build-std` is not influenced by
the dependencies of the current crate.

In addition, `build-std` can be set in the `[target.<triple>]` and
`[target.<cfg>]` sections. If set, this takes precedence over the configuration
in `[profile]`.

Cargo will use the pre-built standard library automatically depending on the
value of the `build-std` key ([?][rationale-why-automatic]):

- If `build-std = "off"`, then the pre-built standard library artifact is always
  used. If it is not present or is incompatible with the rest of the crate graph
  (due to target modifiers), rustc will emit an error.

  Profile changed/customised? | Target modifiers changed? | Standard library re-built?
  --------------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------
  No                          | No                        | No
  Yes                         | No                        | No
  Yes                         | Yes                       | Error!
- If `build-std = "target-modifiers"`, then the pre-built standard library will
  be used as long as it was compiled with target modifiers compatible with the

>   current profile.

Author: `target-modifiers` could always rebuild the release profile, that might be a sensible option - it's sort-of like a "I want the current pre-built std but to keep working with sanitisers or whatever" option. Maybe "target-modifiers-match-profile" that's somewhere in the middle would be good.

Reviewer 4: I think eagerly rebuilding with release and conservatively rebuilding with dev is a good choice, but I think with Eric's feedback we're leaning towards "off" as the default.

  No                          | No                        | No
  Yes                         | No                        | No
  Yes                         | Yes                       | Yes
- If `build-std = "match-profile"`, then the pre-built standard library will be
  used only if it has an identical configuration to the current profile.
  
  Profile changed/customised? | Target modifiers changed? | Standard library re-built?
  --------------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------
  No                          | No                        | No
  Yes                         | No                        | Yes
  Yes                         | Yes                       | Yes

When the pre-built standard library is not used or available, Cargo will build
and use the standard library from source with the requested profile.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Inspired by the concept of [opaque dependencies][Opaque dependencies], the
> dependencies of the standard library crates are entirely opaque to the user,
> who cannot control compilation any of the dependencies of the `core`, `alloc`

> > or `std` standard library crates individually.

Author: This paragraph isn't implementation detail. We should also tie into opaque dependencies more.

> produced (no `dylib`) ([?][rationale-no-dylib]). It will be built into the
> `target` directory of the crate or workspace like any other dependency.

> [!NOTE]
>
> A key detail in build-std is the contract between rustc and Cargo that must be
> upheld when Cargo is providing standard library dependencies:
>
> rustc only requires that `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/std.lib`,
> `--extern noprelude:alloc=path/to/alloc.lib` and
> `--extern noprelude:core=path/to/core.lib` be passed, assuming all three
> crates are required. No other `--extern` flags are required.
>
> `--extern noprelude:alloc=path/to/alloc.lib` and
> `--extern noprelude:core=path/to/core.lib` are only required in addition to
> `--extern noprelude:std=path/to/std.lib` so that writing `extern crate alloc`
> or `extern crate core` works as it does with the pre-built standard library
> from the sysroot.
> 
> rustc will find any dependencies of these crates first from the paths provided
> with `-L dependency=` and then from the sysroot. rustc will attempt to load
> some crates like `compiler_builtins` and `panic_unwind` itself.
>
> rustc will need patched to be able to load `panic_unwind` from

> > `-L dependency=` paths.

Author: Elaborate on this once we understand the change required a bit better.

> 
> Cargo will load the sysroot crate in the standard library and perform the
> resolve on that workspace with the packages that the user has a explicit

> > dependency on and those which require `--extern` to be passed explicitly.

Author: This last paragraph is far from detailed enough.

Reviewer 4: Much of this info box has been expanded in background-preludes or rationale-builtin-implied-direct or is slightly incorrect so I've cut it out or moved it above.

The host pre-built standard library will always be used for procedural macros
and build scripts ([?][rationale-sysroot-for-host-deps]). Artifact dependencies
use the same standard library as the rest of the crate (pre-built or

> newly-built, as appropriate).

Author: Artifact dependencies might be worth elaborating on. Relating build-std to artifact dependencies more would be a useful synergy to highlight, synergies always help RFCs. Re-read that RFC and see what comes to mind.

Reviewer 5: I was slightly surprised upon reading till this point that multi-target workspaces wasn't discussed. I might be a little biased for trying to get that working alongside `-Zbuild-std` for the past two years but it's also possible that no one pointed me to wg-cargo-std-aware and as such this idea never ended up getting tracked.

both bindeps and `per-pkg-target` (i.e. `default-target = "xx"` or `forced-target = "xx"` in `Cargo.toml`) enable `cargo` to do multi-target builds. The latter allows you to compile different crates with different targets at the same time (with `cargo build --workspace` or similar) while the former enables crates of different targets on the dependency graph.

`-Zbuild-std`'s design inherently prevents synergy with multi-target builds. There should be some discussion of it here or earlier about how these features may allow build-std for different targets at the same time or different to the default target.

To copy from [my PR](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/pull/15670) about the use case: this could enable a binary crate on `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` with an artifact dependency on a library crate `amdgcn-amd-amdhsa`. The binary crate will then load the produced amdgpu artifact through runtime HIP/ROCm libraries. Best case scenario would be to allow `cargo run` to _just work_. With `-Zbuild-std` this is a complicated setup.

Author: This is a good point, we'll need to elaborate on how this proposal interacts with these features.

Reviewer 4: The main issue I see is that the RFC ignores per-package profile overrides. Cargo does not have per-target profiles so the only way to change settings on a per-target basis is setting `target.<triple>.rustflags` in the config or by overriding the profile for every dep for that target. These changes wouldn't appear in the base profile so wouldn't go into the `build-std` decision or be applied when rebuilding the standard library.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why put `build-std` in the Cargo config?*][rationale-build-std-in-config]
- [*Why not always rebuild when the profile changes?*][rationale-why-not-always-rebuild]
- [*Why have different build-std defaults depending on the profile?*][rationale-different-defaults]
- [*Why rebuild the standard library automatically?*][rationale-why-automatic]
- [*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][rationale-lockfile]
- [*Why not build the standard library in incremental?*][rationale-incremental]
- [*Why not produce a `dylib` for the standard library?*][rationale-no-dylib]
- [*Why use the pre-built standard library for procedural macros and build-scripts?*][rationale-sysroot-for-host-deps]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*Where should the `build-std` configuration in `.cargo/config` be and what should it be called?*][unresolved-config-location-name]
- [*What should the values of the `build-std` config be named?*][unresolved-config-values]

### Profiles
[profiles]: #profiles

Cargo will assume that the pre-built standard library matches the standard

> library's release profile ([?][rationale-assume-release-profile]). If the user

Author: I don't love this mechanism, I think it's directionally correct but it would be nice to be less assume-y.

changes the default release profile or builds with a different profile then this
could trigger a rebuild of the standard library
([?][rationale-ship-debug-std]), depending on the value of the `build-std`
config as above.

User's Cargo profile | Target modifiers changed? | Standard library profile
-------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------
`release`            | No                        | `release` (pre-built)
`dev`                | No                        | `release` (pre-built)
`release`            | Yes                       | `release` (newly built)

> `dev`                | Yes                       | `dev` (newly built)

Author: Clarify that this table is with build-std set to `target-modifiers`

> [!NOTE]
> 
> If `build-std` is set to `target-modifiers`, Cargo must decide if `build-std`
> should be enabled. rustc will add a `--print target-modifiers` flag which will
> print all of the flags treated as target modifiers, like `-Zretpoline`, with
> one flag per line and its default value.
> 
> If changing a profile configuration would result in one of these flags being
> emitted by Cargo then it assumes a target modifier has changed from the
> default release profile and would no longer match the pre-built standard
> library.

Unlike other dependencies, the profiles defined in the standard library's
workspace will apply to its build even when used as a dependency
([?][rationale-respect-std-profile]) and the user's profile configuration will

> override it only where the user's profile differs from its default.

Author: Should clarify how this works - does the profile for all the deps affect that dep, or is it just the profile in the workspace? What's practical to do? It's a bit vague. We want the standard library to have different defaults than a regular profile, probably, and that needs to be defined in such a way that build-std can use it and then make small tweaks on top, and this seems like a reasonable way of using what we have to do that, but it's unsatisfyingly vague.

the current profile as defined in the standard library's workspace. For example,
if using the `release` profile and the standard library needs to be rebuilt,
then the release profile of the standard library workspace will be used.

If the user customises their profile from its defaults, then the modified
options will be merged with the standard library's profile
([?][rationale-why-merge]). For example, if the user sets
`profile.release.opt-level` that will override the standard library's release
`opt-level` and if the user sets `profile.release.rustflags` that will be
appended to the standard library's release `rustflags`. Merging behaviour for
profile fields will be determined by the type of the field (e.g. lists are
appended and strings/integers overridden).

Profile overrides in the standard library's workspace continue to apply to its
dependencies ([?][rationale-respect-profile-overrides]). User profile overrides
for specific crates can only apply to the `std`, `alloc` and `core` crates
([?][rationale-why-not-override-std-deps]).

Changes to the rustc options passed to the `std`, `alloc` and `core` crates also

> apply to their dependencies.

Author: This makes an amount of sense, if we set `opt-level=z` for `std`, we actually want that for the whole standard library, not just `std` - but what if you have `std` and `core` explicitly and only override `std`? Need way more clarity.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand how this can work. `std` and `alloc` both depend on compiler_builtins, how should conflicts be resolved?

I think per-crate profile overrides should be removed and left to a proper opaque dependencies proposal.

> example, writing `extern crate foo` in a crate will not load `foo.rlib` from
> the sysroot if it is present, but if an `--extern noprelude:bar.rlib` is
> provided which depends on a crate `foo`, rustc will look in `-L` paths and the
> sysroot for it.

All Cargo dependencies are provided to the compiler using the
`--extern noprelude:` flag ([?][rationale-noprelude-with-extern]), including
explicit and implicit standard library dependencies.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why prevent rustc from loading root dependencies from the sysroot?*][rationale-root-sysroot-deps]
- [*Why use `noprelude` with `--extern`?*][rationale-noprelude-with-extern]

### Vendored `rust-src`
[vendored-rust-src]: #vendored-rust-src

When it is necessary to build the standard library, Cargo will look for sources
in a fixed location in the sysroot ([?][rationale-custom-src-path]):
`lib/rustlib/src`. rustup's `rust-src` component downloads standard library
sources to this location. If the sources are not found, Cargo will emit an error
and recommend the user download `rust-src` if using rustup.

`rust-src` will contain the sources for the standard library crates as well as

> its vendored dependencies ([?][rationale-vendoring]). Sources of standard

Author: Maybe clarify that vendoring is possible because std is its own workspace? And add std-has-its-own-workspace as a constraint that we're depending on in the section where we talk about those.

> library dependencies will not be fetched from crates.io.

Author: Clarify that "not fetching from crates.io" is a consequence of the vendoring.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Cargo will not perform any checks to ensure that the sources in `rust-src`
> have been modified ([?][rationale-src-modifications]). It will be documented
> that modifying these sources is not supported.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not allow the source path for the standard library be customised?*][rationale-custom-src-path]
- [*Why vendor standard library dependencies?*][rationale-vendoring]
- [*Why not check if `rust-src` has been modified?*][rationale-src-modifications]

### Building the standard library on a stable toolchain
[building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain]: #building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain

rustc will automatically assume `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when the source path of the
crate being compiled is within the same sysroot as the rustc binary being
invoked ([?][rationale-implied-bootstrap]). Cargo will not need to use

> `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when compiling the standard library with a stable toolchain.

Author: I like this change, it's very easy but it's probably not strictly relevant to the rebuilding std section and could be another top-level change.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why allow building from the sysroot with implied `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`?*][rationale-implied-bootstrap]

### Panic strategies
[panic-strategies]: #panic-strategies-1

Panic strategies are unlike other profile settings insofar as they influence
which crates and flags are passed to the standard library. For example, if
`panic = "unwind"` were set in the Cargo profile then the `panic_unwind` feature
would need to be provided to `std` and `-Cpanic=unwind` passed to suggest that
the compiler use that panic runtime.

If the current crate has no dependency on `std` (i.e. have added an `alloc` or
`core` dependency explicitly to opt-out of the implicit `std` dependency), then
Cargo will not build either of the `panic_unwind` or `panic_abort` crates or
pass `-Cpanic` to rustc. In this circumstance, if `panic` is set in the Cargo
profile, then this value will be ignored and Cargo will emit a warning informing

> the user of this.

Author: Justify why this is, and provide an example of the warning.

Reviewer 4: Reworking this as rustc already throws an error:

```
error: unwinding panics are not supported without std
  |
  = help: using nightly cargo, use -Zbuild-std with panic="abort" to avoid unwinding
  = note: since the core library is usually precompiled with panic="unwind", rebuilding your crate with panic="abort" may not be enough to fix the problem

error: could not compile `no_std` (bin "no_std") due to 1 previous error
```

From a bit of digging I think that should continue to work whenever there's a crate that isn't no_std in the graph.

If the crate does depend on `std`, then Cargo's behaviour depends on whether or
not `panic` is set in the profile:

- If `panic` is not set in the profile then unwinding may still be the default
  for the target and Cargo will need to enable the `panic_unwind` feature to the
  standard library just in case it is used.
- If `panic` is set to "unwind" then the `panic_unwind` feature will be enabled
  and `-Cpanic=unwind` will be passed.
- If `panic` is set to "abort" then `-Cpanic=abort` will be passed.
  - `panic_abort` is a non-optional dependency of `std` so it will always be
    built.

Tests, benchmarks, build scripts and proc macros continue to ignore the "panic"
setting and `panic = "unwind"` is always used - which means the standard library
needs to be recompiled again if the user is using "abort". Once
`panic-abort-tests` is stabilised, the standard library can be built with the
profile's panic strategy even for tests and benchmarks.

Cargo will not inspect the `RUSTFLAGS` environment variable for compilation
flags that would require additional crates to be built for compilation to

> succeed.

Author: Justify this.

Reviewer 4: I've justified it inline but kept it brief, let me know if you think this needs something stronger.

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Avoid building `panic_unwind` unnecessarily*][future-panic_unwind]

### Special object files
[special-object-files]: #special-object-files

A handful of targets require linking against special object files, such as
`windows-gnu`, `linux-musl` and `wasi` targets. For example, `linux-musl`
targets require `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, `crtn.o`, etc.

Since [rust#76185]/[compiler-team#343], the compiler has a stable
`-Clink-self-contained` flag which will look for special object files in
expected locations, typically populated by the `rust-std` components. Its
behaviour can be forced by `-Clink-self-contained=true`, but is force-enabled
for some targets and inferred for others.

Rust can start to ship `rust-self-contained-$target` components for any targets

> which need it (including tier three targets). These components will contain the

Author: Maybe justify why this is possible to do, even for relatively niche targets?

special object files normally included in `rust-std`, and will be distributed
for all tiers of targets. While generally these objects are specific to the
architecture and C runtime (CRT) (and so `rust-self-contained-$arch-$crt` could
be sufficient and result in fewer overall components), it's technically possible
that Rust could support two targets with the same architecture and same CRT but
different versions of the CRT, so having target-specific components is most
future-proof. These would replace the `self-contained` directory in existing
`rust-std` components.

As long as these components have been downloaded, as well as any other support
components, such as `rust-mingw`, rustc's `-Clink-self-contained` will be able
to link against the object files and build-std should never fail on account of

> missing special object files.

Author: Maybe list somewhere all the components we'll need, except to continue to exist or add - a third appendix?!

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Enable local recompilation of special object files/sanitizer runtimes*][future-recompile-special]

### `compiler-builtins-mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtins-mem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) is required by `no_std` crates because `libc` does not

> provide these symbols without `std`.

Author: It might be worth exploring how features like this that we need to enable mechanically interact with enabling/disabling features in `Cargo.toml` that we could hypothetically let people do.

### `libunwind`
[libunwind]: #libunwind

`libunwind`'s sources are included in the `rust-src` component so that they can
be used as part of the standard library build on targets which require it.

### Potential migration breakage
[potential-migration-breakage]: #potential-migration-breakage

When building an existing `no_std` project for a tier two or three target with
build-std, there could be an implicit dependency on `std` from a dependency
`no_std` crate that has not yet made its dependency on only the `core` crate
explicit, for example. In this circumstance, this would fail to build as the
target will have had `standard_library_support.std = false` in its target
specification and Cargo will refuse to build `std` (see
[*Target standard library support*][target-standard-library-support])
([?][rationale-breakage]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why permit breakage of nightly build-std users using tier three targets?*][rationale-breakage]

### Caching
[caching]: #caching

Standard library artifacts built by build-std will not be shared between crates
or workspaces, as they only exist in the `target` directory of a specific crate

> or workspace ([?][rationale-caching]).

Author: I think this is worth saying because people asked for it and we should make it clear that we're not doing it, but it feels weird to have a section just for it when it's not actually proposing anything - like the sanitizers section below.

alloc
rust standard library
license: Apache 2.0 + MIT
rust-version: 1.86.0
documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.86.0/alloc/index.html
```

```shell-session
$ cargo info core
core
rust standard library
license: Apache 2.0 + MIT
rust-version: 1.86.0
documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.86.0/core/index.html
```

[`cargo metadata`][cargo-metadata] will emit `std`, `alloc` and `core`
dependencies to the metadata emitted by `cargo metadata` (when those crates are
dependencies). None of the standard library's dependencies will be included.
`source` would be set to `builtin` and the remaining fields would be set like
any other dependency.

> [!NOTE]
>
> `cargo metadata` output could look as follows:
> 
> ```json
> {
>   "packages": [
>     {
>       /* ... */
>       "dependencies": [
>         {
>           "name": "std",
>           "source": "builtin",
>           "req": "*",
>           "kind": null,
>           "rename": null,
>           "optional": false,
>           "uses_default_features": true,
>           "features": ["compiler-builtins-mem"],
>           "target": null,
>           "public": truee
>         }
>       ],
>       /* ... */
>     }
>   ]

> > }               

Author: Need to run this through my regular editor to remove the trailing spaces.

Standard library crates are already vendored in the `rust-src` component, so do
not require network access once downloaded.

The following commands will now build the standard library if required as part
of the compilation of the project, just like any other dependency:

- [`cargo bench`][cargo-bench]
- [`cargo build`][cargo-build]
- [`cargo check`][cargo-check]
- [`cargo clippy`][cargo-clippy]
- [`cargo doc`][cargo-doc]
- [`cargo fix`][cargo-fix]
- [`cargo run`][cargo-run]
- [`cargo rustc`][cargo-rustc]
- [`cargo rustdoc`][cargo-rustdoc]
- [`cargo test`][cargo-test]

build-std has no implications for the following Cargo subcommands:

- [`cargo fmt`][cargo-fmt]
- [`cargo generate-lockfile`][cargo-generate-lockfile]
- [`cargo help`][cargo-help]
- [`cargo init`][cargo-init]
- [`cargo install`][cargo-install]
- [`cargo locate-project`][cargo-locate-project]
- [`cargo login`][cargo-login]
- [`cargo logout`][cargo-logout]
- [`cargo new`][cargo-new]
- [`cargo owner`][cargo-owner]
- [`cargo package`][cargo-package]
- [`cargo publish`][cargo-publish]
- [`cargo search`][cargo-search]
- [`cargo uninstall`][cargo-uninstall]
- [`cargo version`][cargo-version]
- [`cargo yank`][cargo-yank]

> 

Author: Might be worth discussing popular third-party Cargo subcommands.

## Constraints on the standard library, compiler and bootstrap
[constraints-on-the-standard-library]: #constraints-on-the-standard-library-compiler-and-bootstrap

A stable mechanism for building the standard library imposes some constraints on
the rest of the toolchain that would need to be upheld:

- No further customisation of the pre-built standard library through any means
  other than the profile in `Cargo.toml`

> - No new C dependencies on the standard library

Author: Need to think about a bunch more of these - e.g. we'll always have core/alloc/std, etc. Need another re-read of the RFC to find them.

Reviewer 4: I've since expanded this but I agree this needs a proper full reread to make sure we get them all.

of a layering violation). It is also unclear how Cargo would find and use the
uncustomised host sysroot for build scripts and procedural macros.

### Why not replace `#![no_std]` as the source-of-truth for whether a crate depends on `std`?
[rationale-replace-no_std]: #why-not-replace-no_std-as-the-source-of-truth-for-whether-a-crate-depends-on-std

Crates can currently use the crate attribute `#![no_std]` to indicate a lack of
dependency on `std`. With `Cargo.toml` being used to express a dependency on the
standard library (or lack thereof), it is unintuitive for there to be two
sources-of-truth for this information.

`#![no_std]` serves two purposes - it stops the compiler from loading `std` from
the sysroot and adding `extern crate std`, and it prevents the user from
depending on anything from `std` accidentally.

`#![no_std]` could hypothetically be replaced by a lint to prevent use of the
standard library and a change to the compiler so that it loads the `std`
speculatively unless it is used.

However, while rustc does have some support for speculatively loading crates, it
is not possible to do so and not declare them as a dependency in cross-crate

> metadata.

Author: Given this isn't possible, we should discuss the interactions between `no_std` and what we propose somewhere. It'll largely just be that rustc might ignore whatever Cargo gives it, but worth saying that.

best-effort mechanism of avoiding unnecessary rebuilds of the standard library.
Alternatively, rustc could expose the ability to dump the configuration options
used with an rlib so that Cargo could compare against the compilation flags it
intends to use, or rustc could take an rlib and the proposed compilation flags
as arguments and return an exit code indicating whether the provided flags
differ from those used with the rlib.

↩ [*Profiles*][profiles]

### Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std`?
[rationale-ship-debug-std]: #why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std

As the default configuration for `build-std` is `target-modifiers`, debug builds
of the user's crate would not trigger a rebuild of the standard library and
would use the pre-built standard library (as the release profile does not change
any target modifiers compared to the debug profile). It would only be when
`build-std = "always"` that any debug build would first trigger a rebuild of the
standard library.

To improve the user experience in this circumstance, it could be worth shipping
a debug profile `rust-std`, but as this is not the common case, it isn't

> proposed in this RFC. Some intrinsics rely on optimisations so a debug profile

Reviewer 4: Do you refer to the bug regarding const propagation with some arm intrinsics here?

Author: I didn't have a specific example in mind, @wesleywiser mentioned that this was the case and I was pretty sure that was accurate even if an example didn't come to mind immediately.

dependency on `std`. Multiple standard library crates can be added as
dependencies:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true }
core = { builtin = true }
```

Standard library dependencies cannot be renamed.

Implicit and explicit standard library dependencies are added to `Cargo.lock`
([?][rationale-cargo-lock]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why explicitly declare dependencies on the standard library in `Cargo.toml`?*][rationale-why-explicit-deps]
- [*Why disallow builtin dependencies to be combined with other sources?*][rationale-builtin-other-sources]
- [*Why disallow builtin dependencies on other crates?*][rationale-no-builtin-other-crates]
- [*Why not migrate to always requiring explicit standard library dependencies?*][rationale-no-migration]
- [*Why add standard library dependencies to Cargo.lock?*][rationale-cargo-lock]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*What syntax is used to identify dependencies on the standard library in `Cargo.toml`?*][unresolved-dep-syntax]

> ## Non-`builtin` standard library dependencies

Author: ```suggestion
### Non-`builtin` standard library dependencies
```

## Rebuilding the standard library
[rebuilding-the-standard-library]: #rebuilding-the-standard-library

Cargo configuration will contain a new key `build-std` under the `[profile]`
section, permitting one of three values - "off", "target-modifiers" or
"match-profile" ([?][rationale-build-std-in-config]):

```toml
[profile.dev]
build-std = "target-modifiers" # or `off`/`match-profile`
```

`build-std` defaults to "target-modifiers" for the `dev` profile
([?][rationale-why-not-always-rebuild]) and to "match-profile" for the `release`
profile ([?][rationale-different-defaults]). `test` inherits this from `dev` and
`bench` from `release`.

As the Cargo configuration is local to the current installation of Cargo
(typically in `~/.config/cargo`), the value of `build-std` is not influenced by
the dependencies of the current crate.

In addition, `build-std` can be set in the `[target.<triple>]` and
`[target.<cfg>]` sections. If set, this takes precedence over the configuration
in `[profile]`.

Cargo will use the pre-built standard library automatically depending on the
value of the `build-std` key ([?][rationale-why-automatic]):

> - If `build-std = "off"`, then the pre-built standard library artifact is always

Author: I was chatting with Jonathan Pallant and he raised an interesting consideration - in a qualified environment, build-std doesn't help you much because as soon as the user tweaks libcore, say, then they're using something that hasn't went through all the testing and you don't want that.

`build-std = "off"` is useful for ensuring that doesn't happen (so we should add this as a justification for that option)

It also bolsters the motivation for something @wesleywiser mentioned to me - eholk is looking at adding support for having multiple libstds in the sysroot with different configurations and have the compiler pick the right one. Their use case was asan-enabled libstd and regular libstd, but having variations on libcore for different small variations in a target (e.g. like you have [for some embedded targets](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/platform-support/thumbv8m.main-none-eabi.html#table-of-supported-cpus-for-thumbv8mmain-none-eabi)).

Reviewer 4: Added a rationale for this

to find the standard library crates on crates.io and fail unless empty crates
were published named `core`, `alloc` and `std`. This is not a build-std specific
issue and is true of any RFC adding to what can be written in `Cargo.toml`.

↩ [*Standard library dependencies*][standard-library-dependencies]

### Why add standard library dependencies to `Cargo.lock`?
[rationale-cargo-lock]: #why-add-standard-library-dependencies-to-cargolock

`Cargo.lock` is a direct serialisation of a resolve and that must be a two-way
non-lossy process in order to make the `Cargo.lock` useful without doing further
resolution to fill in missing `builtin` packages.

↩ [*Standard library dependencies*][standard-library-dependencies]

### Why add standard library crates to Cargo's index?
[rationale-cargo-index]: #why-add-standard-library-crates-to-cargos-index

When Cargo builds the dependency graph, it is driven by the index (not
`Cargo.toml`), so builtin dependencies need to be included in the index.

Even if a `builtin` package can be unambiguously represented as an entry in
the `deps` key, older versions of Cargo expect to find packages either in the

> current registry or at the URL under the `registry` key. This could cause them

Author: s/could/would

Also, I try to avoid too much "this"/"them" phrasing where you need to think about what this/them refer to.

> to fail upon encountering a `builtin` package not in a registry. Adding "dummy"

Author: "dummy" doesn't need to be in quotes. We need to introduce this sentence better, "A std/alloc/core dependency in the index could be found in the registry if dummy packages were added to.." - so it is clearer what adding the dummy packages is aiming to address.

- Feature Name: `build-std`
- Start Date: 2025-06-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

<!--

This document has lots of links and anchors and internal references, follow
these rules to keep it consistent:

- Text is wrapped at ~80 characters, except for headings
- Every header has a reference link defined below it with its anchor. Top-level
  sections just match the header text. Other sections have a prefix (e.g.

>   "rationale-foo", not "foo).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  "rationale-foo", not "foo").
```

relevant.

The `std` crate has a `panic_unwind` feature that enables an optional dependency
on the `panic_unwind` crate.

`core` also has a `panic_immediate_abort` feature which modifies the
`core::panic!` macro to immediately call the abort intrinsic without calling the
panic handler. `std` and `alloc` have the same feature which enable the feature
in `core`. `std`'s feature also adds an immediate abort to its `panic!` macro.

## Target modifiers
[background-target-modifiers]: #target-modifiers

[rfcs#3716] introduced the concept of *target modifiers* to rustc. Flags marked
as target modifiers must match across the entire crate graph or the compilation
will fail.

For example, flags are made target modifiers when they change the ABI of
generated code and could result in unsound ABI mismatches if two crates are
linked together with different values of the flag set.

# History
[history]: #history

*The following summary of the prior art is necessarily less detailed than the
source material, which is exhaustively surveyed in
[Appendix II: Exhaustive literature review][appendix-ii].*

## [rfcs#1133] (2015)
[rfcs-1133-2015]: #rfcs1133-2015

> build-std was first proposed in a [2015 RFC (rfcs#1133))][rfcs#1133] by

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
build-std was first proposed in a [2015 RFC (rfcs#1133)][rfcs#1133] by
```

   workspace.

3. **Dependencies of the standard library**

   There are a handful of dependencies of the standard library that may pose
   challenges for build-std by dint of needing a working C toolchain or
   special-casing.

   [`libbacktrace`][wg-cargo-std-aware#16] previously required a C compiler to
   build `backtrace-sys`, but now uses `gimli` internally.

   [`compiler_builtins`][wg-cargo-std-aware#15] has a `c` feature that uses C
   versions of some intrinsics that are more optimised. This is used by the
   pre-built standard library, and if not used by build-std, could be a point of
   divergence. `compiler-builtins/c` can have a significant impact on code
   quality and build size. It also has a `mem` feature which provides symbols
   (`memcopy`, etc) for platforms without `std` that don't have these same
   symbols provided by `libc`. compiler-builtins is also built with a large
   number of compilation units to force each function into a different unit.

   [Sanitizers][wg-cargo-std-aware#17], when enabled, require a sanitizer
   runtime to be present. These are currently built by bootstrap and part of

>    LLVM.

Reviewer 5: nit: this is duplicating the Dependencies section under History, should eliminate the duplication somehow.

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#13] aimed to determine how to determine the default set
   of cfg values for the standard library. This is currently determined by
   bootstrap. This could be duplicated in Cargo in the short-term, made visible
   to build-std through some configuration, or require the user to explicitly
   declare them.

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#14] looks into additional rustc flags and environment
   variables passed by bootstrap to the compiler. A comparison of the
   compilation flags from bootstrap and build-std was [posted in a comment][wg-cargo-std-aware#14-review].
   No solutions were suggested, other than that it may need a similar mechanism
   as [wg-cargo-std-aware#13].

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#29] tries to determine how to support different panic
   strategies. Should Cargo use the profile to decide what to use? How does it
   know which panic strategy crate to use? It is argued that Cargo ought to work
   transparently - if the user sets the panic strategy differently then a
   rebuild is triggered.

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#30] identifies that some targets have special handling in
   bootstrap which will need to be duplicated in build-std. Targets could be

>    whitelisted or blacklisted to avoid having to address this initially.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   allowlisted or denylisted to avoid having to address this initially.
```

   completely new target specs to hit `restricted_std`.

   [wg-cargo-std-aware#92] suggests that some targets could be made "unstable"
   and as such only support build-std on nightly. This forces users of those
   targets to use nightly where they will receive more frequent fixes for their
   target. It would also permit more experimentation with build-std while
   enabling stabilisation for mainstream targets.

5. **Implementation considerations**
   These won't be discussed in this summary, see [the implementation summary][implementation-summary]
   or [the relevant section of the literature review for more detail][implementation]

6. **Bugs in the compiler or standard library**
   These aren't especially relevant to this summary, see [the relevant section
   of the literature review for more detail][bugs-in-the-compiler-or-standard-library]

7. **Cargo feature requests narrowly applied to build-std**
   These aren't especially relevant to this summary, see [the relevant section
   of the literature review for more detail][cargo-feature-requests-narrowly-applied-to-build-std]

Since around 2020, activity in the [wg-cargo-std-aware] repository largely

> trailed of and there have not been any significant developments related to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
trailed off and there have not been any significant developments related to
```

   `target-feature` can improve the performance of code generation or allow the
   use of newer hardware features than the target's baseline provides. As above,
   these configuration will not apply to the pre-built standard library
 - While the pre-built standard library is built to support debugging without
   compromising size and performance by setting `debuginfo=1`, this isn't
   ideal, and building the standard library with the dev profile would provide
   a better experience

2. **Unblock stabilisation of ABI-modifying compiler flags**

  - Any compiler flags which change the ABI cannot currently be stabilised as they
    would immediately mismatch with the pre-built standard library
    - Without an ability to rebuild the standard library using these flags, it is
      impossible to use them effectively and safely if stabilised
  - ABI-modifying flags are designated as target modifiers ([rfcs#3716]/[rust#136966])
    and require that the same value for the flag is passed to all compilation units
    - Flags which need to be set across the entire crate graph to uphold some
      property (i.e. enhanced security) are also target modifiers

>     - For example: sanitizers, control flow integriy, `-Zfixed-x18`, etc

Reviewer 5: Question: How important/negotiable are these goals if they will significantly increase the contentiousness of this proposal?

Stabilizing ABI-modifying flags or otherwise custom build options, as described here, might lead to problems regarding what guarantees, especially the libs team can provide. It's hard to know nor test that all possible combinations of build options/flags/targets work, and it seems like a particularly hard goal.

Making this available on nightly is at least more realistic. But I feel like if we wanted to ship anything to stable, it might be better to only focus on building tier-3 targets for a stable MVP.

Author: I think this highlights something the RFC is missing - what we propose the project's stability guarantees ought to be for what build-std enables.

This is somewhere that I expect I might diverge from other teams, but I'm absolutely comfortable with build-std enabling users to do things that might not work or build, and for the mechanisms that enable that to be stable, as long as we are clear about what guarantees we do and do not provide.

I think if we only want to support configurations on stable that are well-tested and guaranteed-to-work then build-std will be much less useful feature for the vast majority of users.

6. **Using miri on a stable toolchain**

  - Using miri requires building the standard library with specific compiler flags
    that would not be appropriate for the pre-built standard library, so is forced
    to require nightly and build its own sysroot

The following use cases are not supported by this RFC, but could be supported
with follow-up RFCs (and this RFC will attempt to ensure they remain viable as
future possiblities):

1. **Using the standard library with custom targets**

  - There is no stable mechanism for using the standard library for a custom
    target (using target-spec-json)
  - Like tier three targets, these targets often only support `core` and are
    forced to use nightly today

2. **Enabling Cargo features for the standard library** ([wg-cargo-std-aware#4])

  - There are opportunities to expose Cargo features from the standard library that
    would be useful for certain subsets of the Rust users.
    - For example, embedded users may want to enable a feature like `optimize_for_size` or
      `panic_immediate_abort` to reduce binary size

Some use cases are unlikely to supported by the project unless a new and

> compelling use-case is presented, andsso this RFC may make decisions which make

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
compelling use-case is presented, so this RFC may make decisions which make
```

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { .. }

[patch.builtin] # permitted on nightly
std = { path = "../libstd" }
```

As with any other `path` or `git` dependency, crates with these dependency
sources will not be able to be published to crates.io.

It is not possible to perform source replacement on standard library
dependencies using `builtin = true`.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why permit patching of the standard library dependencies on nightly?*][rationale-patching]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*What syntax is used to patch dependencies on the standard library in `Cargo.toml`?*][unresolved-patch-syntax]

### Features
[features]: #features-1

On a stable toolchain, it is not permitted to enable or disable features of
explicit standard library dependencies ([?][rationale-features]), as in the
below example:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
std = { builtin = true, features = [ "foo" ] } # not permitted
# ..or..
std = { builtin = true, default-features = false } # not permitted
```

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

> - [*Why limit enabling standard library features to nightly?*][why-limit-enabling-standard-library-features-to-nightly]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [*Why limit enabling standard library features to nightly?*][rationale-features]
```

- [*What should the values of the `build-std` config be named?*][unresolved-config-values]

### Profiles
[profiles]: #profiles

Cargo will assume that the pre-built standard library matches the standard
library's release profile ([?][rationale-assume-release-profile]). If the user
changes the default release profile or builds with a different profile then this
could trigger a rebuild of the standard library
([?][rationale-ship-debug-std]), depending on the value of the `build-std`
config as above.

User's Cargo profile | Target modifiers changed? | Standard library profile
-------------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------
`release`            | No                        | `release` (pre-built)
`dev`                | No                        | `release` (pre-built)
`release`            | Yes                       | `release` (newly built)
`dev`                | Yes                       | `dev` (newly built)

> [!NOTE]
>
> If `build-std` is set to `target-modifiers`, Cargo must decide if `build-std`
> should be enabled. rustc will add a `--print target-modifiers` flag which will

> > print all of the flags treated as target modifiers, like `-Zretpoline`, with

Reviewer 2: Cargo has no knowledge of these flags, so I'm not sure how this would work.

Author: I imagined that Cargo would have a list of the flags that it was passing to any given rustc invocation, and it could - without any knowledge of what the flags do - compare them to a list of target modifiers flags provided by rustc, and if the list overlaps then it needs a rebuild.

I'm not the biggest fan of that mechanism though, admittedly. @wesleywiser and I discussed adding some compiler support here, so that Cargo could invoke rustc with the rustc flags derived from the user's profile and with the path to the sysroot's `libstd.rlib` and rustc would tell you if the target modifiers match. As the profile is the same for the entire workspace, Cargo would do this once for the current profile.

Reviewer 4: I like the probe approach as it gives RUSTFLAGS support for free as there's precedent for other build probes [inheriting RUSTFLAGS](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/e4162389d67c603d25ba6e25b0e9423fcb8daa64/src/cargo/core/compiler/build_context/target_info.rs#L770), at least when in cross-compile mode.

The probe could happen after the profile is constructed as it looks like they're built before the resolver runs.

It's possible for profile settings to differ for different crates, but if these differ by a target modifier then that will break anyway.

> one flag per line and its default value.
>
> If changing a profile configuration would result in one of these flags being
> emitted by Cargo then it assumes a target modifier has changed from the
> default release profile and would no longer match the pre-built standard
> library.

Unlike other dependencies, the profiles defined in the standard library's
workspace will apply to its build even when used as a dependency
([?][rationale-respect-std-profile]) and the user's profile configuration will

> override it only where the user's profile differs from its default.

Reviewer 2: I'm worried about all these mechanisms tied to profiles is adding a large amount of special-case code into cargo. I don't have any actionable advice here, just expressing a worry that this is going to be difficult.

Reviewer 4: Opaque dependencies also proposes that that they have their own profile. It's unclear if the user's profile will apply "additively" to them like proposed here but it would be a requirement for supporting target modifiers. Not arguing otherwise, just saying that at least it may not be special-casing that's unique to builtins

Author: This is definitely the part of the RFC with the most unknowns for me where I'd like to try and shore up what we're proposing somewhat.

When rebuilt, standard library crates will be built using the configuration of
the current profile as defined in the standard library's workspace. For example,
if using the `release` profile and the standard library needs to be rebuilt,
then the release profile of the standard library workspace will be used.

If the user customises their profile from its defaults, then the modified
options will be merged with the standard library's profile
([?][rationale-why-merge]). For example, if the user sets
`profile.release.opt-level` that will override the standard library's release
`opt-level` and if the user sets `profile.release.rustflags` that will be
appended to the standard library's release `rustflags`. Merging behaviour for
profile fields will be determined by the type of the field (e.g. lists are

> appended and strings/integers overridden).

Reviewer 5: Okay, that answers the question in my previous comment. This feel suboptimal. The use of configuring custom build options for the standard library should include the use of _fully_ customizing the options, which could include disabling some of the default flags that the standard library uses.

Currently it [doesn't look like](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/library/Cargo.toml) the standard library is setting anything that is in the way, so this point might still be moot.

Author: Yeah, that's certainly not ideal. I'm not the biggest fan of this part of the proposal and expect we'll change it in some way or another. I think the goal of having the default for the standard library crates match the pre-built artifacts is worthwhile, but exactly how or if that can happen is a bit fuzzy.

[building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain]: #building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain

rustc will automatically assume `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when the source path of the
crate being compiled is within the same sysroot as the rustc binary being
invoked ([?][rationale-implied-bootstrap]). Cargo will not need to use
`RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when compiling the standard library with a stable toolchain.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why allow building from the sysroot with implied `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`?*][rationale-implied-bootstrap]

### Panic strategies
[panic-strategies]: #panic-strategies-1

Panic strategies are unlike other profile settings insofar as they influence
which crates and flags are passed to the standard library. For example, if
`panic = "unwind"` were set in the Cargo profile then the `panic_unwind` feature
would need to be provided to `std` and `-Cpanic=unwind` passed to suggest that
the compiler use that panic runtime.

If the current crate has no dependency on `std` (i.e. have added an `alloc` or
`core` dependency explicitly to opt-out of the implicit `std` dependency), then

> Cargo will not build either of the `panic_unwind` or `panic_abort` crates or

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this, why would `panic` not be built or used?

Reviewer 4: Only std's panic handler delegates to a panic runtime, and the panic runtimes are not relevant if std is not used: https://github.com/davidtwco/rfcs/blob/build-std/text/0000-build-std.md#panic-strategies

(non self-referential source: https://www.ralfj.de/blog/2019/11/25/how-to-panic-in-rust.html#panic-runtime)

setting and `panic = "unwind"` is always used - which means the standard library
needs to be recompiled again if the user is using "abort". Once
`panic-abort-tests` is stabilised, the standard library can be built with the
profile's panic strategy even for tests and benchmarks.

Cargo will not inspect the `RUSTFLAGS` environment variable for compilation
flags that would require additional crates to be built for compilation to
succeed.

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Avoid building `panic_unwind` unnecessarily*][future-panic_unwind]

### Special object files
[special-object-files]: #special-object-files

A handful of targets require linking against special object files, such as
`windows-gnu`, `linux-musl` and `wasi` targets. For example, `linux-musl`
targets require `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, `crtn.o`, etc.

Since [rust#76185]/[compiler-team#343], the compiler has a stable
`-Clink-self-contained` flag which will look for special object files in
expected locations, typically populated by the `rust-std` components. Its
behaviour can be forced by `-Clink-self-contained=true`, but is force-enabled
for some targets and inferred for others.

> Rust can start to ship `rust-self-contained-$target` components for any targets

Reviewer 5: Hmmm. Why does the target name need to be contained in the component name at all? Each target can just ship its own `rust-self-contained` component.

Author: This is what I intended, just phrased poorly.

missing special object files.

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Enable local recompilation of special object files/sanitizer runtimes*][future-recompile-special]

### `compiler-builtins-mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtins-mem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) is required by `no_std` crates because `libc` does not
provide these symbols without `std`.

It is necessary that the `compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `alloc` and/or
`core` be enabled when `std` is not in the crate graph
([?][rationale-no-weak-linkage]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not use weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?*][rationale-no-weak-linkage]

### `libunwind`
[libunwind]: #libunwind

`libunwind`'s sources are included in the `rust-src` component so that they can
be used as part of the standard library build on targets which require it.

### Potential migration breakage
[potential-migration-breakage]: #potential-migration-breakage

> When building an existing `no_std` project for a tier two or three target with

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why this section wouldn't also apply to tier-1 targets. Also, I'm not understanding. A tier-2 target doesn't need `-Zbuild-std` to use `#![no_std]`. I don't see how those wouldn't break.

Reviewer 5: I got slightly confused upon reading this section too. I can compile a crate that uses `#![no_std]` with `x86_64-unknown-none` (a tier-2 target) right now on stable.

After this RFC, the crate would have an implicit dependency on `std`. But `x86_64-unknown-none` has `standard_library_support.std = false`. So would cargo error?

.. or would this only apply to when cargo attempts to build std, so the implicit+loaded from sysroot path doesn't, for some reason? Should probably be specified.

Reviewer 4: The wording here slowly evolved into something awkard - it's this way because there are no tier 1 no_std targets. Specifically this occurs if any crate in a project has an implicit dependency on std (which no_std projects may have if any crate is not updated to support builtins) and the project is built for a no_std target. I'll reword it

[rust#123617]) or to expose sanitizer configuration in Cargo, but it is
instructive to examine how build-std would enable sanitizer support to ensure
that the proposed design is compatible.

rustc's flag to enable sanitizers will be a target modifier, as the
instrumentation must be present for all of the crates to avoid false negatives.

rustc's sanitizer support attempts to locate sanitizer runtimes in the sysroot
(`$sysroot/lib/rustlib/$target/lib/`) to link against. Rust already ships
sanitizer runtimes for targets that support sanitizers and with the use of
`build-std` as proposed in this RFC all Rust crates in a crate graph should have
coverage with the requested sanitizers.

Combining these shipped sanitizer runtimes with other target modifiers is
outside the scope of this RFC.

## Cargo subcommands
[cargo-subcommands]: #cargo-subcommands

As opaque dependencies, any Cargo command which accepts a package spec with `-p`
will only additionally recognise `core`, `alloc` and `std` and none of their
dependencies. Many of Cargo's subcommands will need modification to support
build-std:

[`cargo add`][cargo-add] will add `core`, `alloc` or `std` explicitly to the

> manifest if invoked with those crate names:

Reviewer 5: Hmm, interesting. Perhaps it should also enforce the nightly toolchain when trying to add it with features.

Target specifications have typically been considered part of the compiler and
there has been hesistation to have target specs be the source of truth for
information like standard library support, as this is the domain of the library
team and ought to be owned by the standard library (such as in the standard
library's `build.rs`). However, with appropriate processes and sync points,
there is no reason why the target specification could not be primarily
maintained by t-compiler but in close coordination with library and other
relevant teams.

↩ [*Target standard library support*][target-standard-library-support]

### Why record support for `core`, `alloc` and `std` separately?
[rationale-target-spec-core-alloc-std]: #why-record-support-for-core-alloc-and-std-separately

It is intuitive that some targets may not support the standard library and so
needing to keep track of whether `std` is supported is necessary. However, it is
not obvious why keeping track of whether `alloc` and `core` are supported
individually is necessary:

Most targets will support `core`. `core` would only be set to `false` for very
experimental targets which do not support build-std at all. `alloc` would be set

> to `false` for those targets that do not support allocation.

Reviewer 5: A more thorough discussion on what it means for a target to have `standard_library_support` seems missing.

I am particularly interested in `alloc` because that will probably be the most contentious part. The current example in the specific section states `x86_64-unknown-none` as having both `core` and `alloc` support but `mipsel-sony-psx` as only having `core` support; However the rustc doc on the [mipsel-sony-psx](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/platform-support/mipsel-sony-psx.html#mipsel-sony-psx) target explicitly guides users of the target to build alloc:

```
cargo build -Zbuild-std=core,alloc --target mipsel-sony-psx
```

Furthermore, it is unclear why `x86_64-unknown-none` is considered as support[ing] allocation. The standard procedure with `build-std` with that target is to bring-your-own-allocator. There needs to be a crate that specifies the global allocator.

Author: `mipsel-sony-psx` was just a target I chose at random assuming it didn't have `alloc` support, so that's just an oversight.

I used `x86_64-unknown-none` as an example because it's my understanding that we ship `liballoc.rlib` for that target today as a pre-built artifact.

I think it's okay to permit the user to build alloc and eventually have compilation fail for lack of a global allocator. I don't think that's much different from a `core`-only crate not including a panic handler crate. I'm not sure if it is a responsibility of build-std/Cargo to ensure that circumstance doesn't happen.

Reviewer 5: I want to assume that ability to build `core` implies an ability to build `alloc`. That for me eliminates the need to separate `alloc` from `core`.

The goals section also mention an ability for people to build standard library crates that a target normally doesn't support (e.g. only using some features from `std`), I wonder how this ties in with a target enabling what kinds of stdlib crates downstream people can build? Maybe there should be an override option for nightly users?

To improve the user experience in this circumstance, it could be worth shipping
a debug profile `rust-std`, but as this is not the common case, it isn't
proposed in this RFC. Some intrinsics rely on optimisations so a debug profile
standard library may result in counterintuitive or unexpected behaviour for
users. If a debug `rust-std` was eventually made available, it might be expected
that it be used for any `debug` profile build, which would involve more
machinery.

↩ [*Profiles*][profiles]

### Why respect the profile of the standard library workspace?
[rationale-respect-std-profile]: #why-respect-the-profile-of-the-standard-library-workspace

Profiles provide a useful place to declaratively write the configuration used
for the pre-built standard library in such a way that Cargo can read it during
build-std. By contrast, configuration for the pre-built standard library that is
defined in bootstrap is entirely opaque to Cargo.

While it is a divergence from other dependencies to respect the profile of the
standard library crates, when the standard library is rebuilt, the newly-built
standard library will deviate as little as possible from the pre-built standard

> library.

Reviewer 5: This feels like a natural consequence of the std workspace being built as opaque dependencies. Might be worth framing it that way.

I'm slightly curious whether some configuration options might be formatted/structured in a way that it would be difficult/impossible for someone to override downstream, but I guess that's not too important.

Author: I've noted in a previous comment that tying in with the idea of opaque dependencies more is probably worthwhile - https://github.com/davidtwco/rfcs/pull/1#discussion_r2162594743.

work like customising the build of any other dependency.

User profile changes only apply to the standard library when they have changed
from their default option values so as to keep the standard library build as
close to the pre-built standard library as possible. Profile changes are merged
to preserve necessary defaults from the standard library's profiles.

↩ [*Profiles*][profiles]

### Why respect profile overrides of the standard library's workspace?
[rationale-respect-profile-overrides]: #why-respect-profile-overrides-of-the-standard-librarys-workspace

Respecting the profile overrides in the standard library's workspace will ensure
that compiler-builtins' profile overrides continue to apply and the crate will
be built with a large number of codegen units to force each intrinsic into its
own CGU and be deduplicated with `libgcc`.

↩ [*Profiles*][profiles]

### Why not allow profile overrides to override the standard library's dependencies?
[rationale-why-not-override-std-deps]: #why-not-allow-profile-overrides-to-override-the-standard-librarys-dependencies

The dependencies of the standard library are an implementation detail and ought

> not be observable to the user.

Reviewer 5: Perhaps as a future extension this could be allowed on nightly.

`--no-implicit-sysroot-deps` is a flag rather than default behaviour to preserve
rustc's usability when invoked outside of Cargo. For example, by compiler
developers when working on rustc.

`--sysroot=''` is an existing mechanism for disabling the sysroot - this is not
used as it remains desirable to load dependencies from the sysroot as a
fallback. In addition, rustc uses the sysroot path to find `rust-lld` and
similar tools and would not be able to do so if the sysroot were disabled by
providing an empty path.

↩ [*Preventing implicit sysroot dependencies*][preventing-implicit-sysroot-dependencies]

### Why use `noprelude` with `--extern`?
[rationale-noprelude-with-extern]: #why-use-noprelude-with---extern

The `noprelude` modifier for `--extern` is necessary for use of the `--extern`
flag to be equivalent to using a modified sysroot.

Without `noprelude`, rustc implicitly inserts a `extern crate $name` when using
`--extern`. As a consequence, if a newly-built `alloc` were passed using
`--extern alloc=alloc.rlib` then `extern crate alloc` would not be required, but
it would be if the pre-built `alloc` could be used. This difference in how a

> crate is made available to rustc should not be observable to the user.

Reviewer 2: It might be a good idea to add a little clarification here about what exactly `noprelude` does, since I think it could be confusing for some (especially if they are not familiar with the different kinds of preludes). For example, it *does* still add `extern crate std;` with noprelude.

In particular, `noprelude` just suppresses adding the name to the [extern prelude](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/names/preludes.html#extern-prelude). That means you can't refer to the crate without an `extern crate`.

However, `std` and `core` are special. Specifically:

- rustc will automatically inject `core` and `std` into the extern prelude (even with the noprelude option): https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ce9c977ffcff7c3b12bfe5629a682da0e74a7a1/compiler/rustc_resolve/src/lib.rs#L1451-L1456
    - `alloc` and other crates are not.
- rustc will automatically add `core` and `std` into the crate root via an implicit `extern crate`: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ce9c977ffcff7c3b12bfe5629a682da0e74a7a1/compiler/rustc_builtin_macros/src/standard_library_imports.rs#L44-L50
    - that would also add it to the extern prelude, I don't recall why it does it both ways.
- The standard library's prelude gets imported with an implicit `use`: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ce9c977ffcff7c3b12bfe5629a682da0e74a7a1/compiler/rustc_builtin_macros/src/standard_library_imports.rs#L54-L65
- The standard library's macros get imported with an implicit `macro_use`: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ce9c977ffcff7c3b12bfe5629a682da0e74a7a1/compiler/rustc_builtin_macros/src/standard_library_imports.rs#L46

(This implicit behavior is documented at https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/names/preludes.html#the-no_std-attribute.)

Author: We can expand the background section to describe the `noprelude` modifier in more detail.

- Standard library dependency versions are fixed to those in the `Cargo.lock`
  anyway, so initial builds with `build-std` start quicker with these
  dependencies already available
- Allow build-std to continue functioning if a `crates.io` dependency is
  "yanked"
  - This leaves the consequences of a toolchain version using yanked
    dependencies the same as without this RFC

..and few disadvantages:

- A larger `rust-src` component takes up more disk space and takes longer to
  download
  - If using build-std, these dependencies would have to be downloaded at build
    time, so this is only an issue if build-std is not used and `rust-src` is
    downloaded.
- Vendored dependencies can't be updated with the latest security fixes
  - This is no different than the pre-built standard library

How this affects `crates.io`/`rustup` bandwidth usage or user time spent
downloading these crates is unclear and depends on user patterns. If not
vendored, Cargo will "lazily" download them the first time `build-std` is used
but this may happen multiple times if they are cleaned from its cache without
upgrading the toolchain version.

See

> [*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][why-use-the-lockfile-of-the-rust-src-component]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][rationale-lockfile]
```

need such special-casing, which is not practical.

↩ [*Building the standard library on a stable toolchain*][building-the-standard-library-on-a-stable-toolchain]

### Why not use weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?
[rationale-no-weak-linkage]: #why-not-use-weak-linkage-for-compiler-builtinsmem-symbols

Since [compiler-builtins#411], the relevant symbols in `compiler_builtins`
already have weak linkage. However, it is nevertheless not possible to simply
remove the `mem` feature and have the symbols always be present.

Some targets, such as those based on MinGW, do not have sufficient support for
weak definitions (at least with the default linker). Furthermore, weak linkage
has precedence over shared libraries and the symbols of a dynamically-linked
`libc` should be preferred over `compiler_builtins`'s symbols.

↩ [*`compiler-builtins-mem`*][compiler-builtins-mem]

### Why permit breakage of nightly build-std users using tier three targets?
[rationale-breakage]: #why-permit-breakage-of-nightly-build-std-users-using-tier-three-targets

As this use case would previously have been using the unstable

> `-Zbuild-std=core`, this user must be on a nightly toolchain. This proposal

Reviewer 2: I don't entirely agree with this. I believe there are people building `rustc` with their own targets, and shipping it themselves, thus having a "stable" version of these targets.

Author: I don't think these targets are "stable" in the sense that the Rust project provides any guarantees for them. If a user is maintaining a downstream fork then they're taking on responsibility to keep that working. I don't think it's especially reasonable to constrain what we can do to save those users from having to fix their fork.

std: true
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target x86_64-unknown-none
target: x86_64-unknown-none
std: false
alloc: true
core: true
$ rustc --print target-standard-library-support --target mipsel-sony-psx
target: mipsel-sony-psx
std: false
alloc: false
core: true
```

On a stable toolchain, if Cargo needs to build one of the standard library
crates for a target, it will check `--print target-standard-library-support` to
determine whether to emit an error.

The existing `restricted_std` mechanism will be removed from the standard
library's [`build.rs`][std-build.rs] as it is replaced by this mechanism.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Should target specifications own knowledge of which standard library crates are supported?*][should-target-specifications-own-knowledge-of-which-standard-library-crates-are-supported]
- [*Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?*][why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target]

### Custom targets and target-spec-json
[custom-targets-and-target-spec-json]: #custom-targets-and-target-spec-json

> Cargo will detect when a custom target is being used and

Reviewer: nit this reads strangely with the extra "and"

```suggestion
Cargo will detect when a custom target is being used
```

to build any of the standard library crates and will emit an error.

Cargo could detect use of a custom target either by comparing it with the list
of built-in targets that rustc reports knowing about (via `--print target-list`)

> or by checking if a file exists at the path matching the provided target name.

Reviewer: I believe `rustc` only accepts custom target files that end in `.json` so this check is probably as simple as `target.ends_with(".json")`

Reviewer: Nope, I'm wrong https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/142608/commits/679a2e3a5b8e57264170403ac86e7eba00035c2d

Author: Clarified what Cargo would need to check in the text here

need to be behind a feature flag so these features can be
removed/enabled-by-default.

### Replacing `#![no_std]` as a source-of-truth
[replacing-no_std-as-a-source-of-truth]: #replacing-no_std-as-a-source-of-truth

Crates can currently use the crate attribute `#![no_std]` to indicate a lack of
dependency on the standard library. With `Cargo.toml` being used to express a
dependency on the standard library (or lack thereof), it is unintuitive for
there to be two sources-of-truth for this information.

`#![no_std]` serves two purposes - it stops the compiler from loading `std` from
the sysroot and adding `extern crate std`, and it prevents the user from
depending on anything from `std` accidentally.

Two new lints will be added to the compiler - `std_use` and `alloc_use`.
`std_use` will trigger if the crate refers to anything from the `std` crate, and
`alloc_use` similarly for the `alloc` crate. Both lints are allow-by-default.

`#![no_std]` will become an alias for `#![deny(std_use)]`. In the next edition,
`#![no_std]` will be rewritten as `#![deny(std_use)]` and its use prohibited.

rustc will always load the standard library, but if it is unused (which would be

> enforced by `#[deny(std_use)]`), then it will "forget" about the dependency.

Reviewer: `alloc` and `std` have a number of diagnostic items in them so the diagnostic item machinery may need to be updated to respect `#[deny(std_use)]` so that it does not suggest inappropriate items.

Author: I've moved this to an alternative because I'm not sure we can actually do it after speaking to @petrochenkov

This is equivalent to the previous behaviour.

**TODO**: double-check with petrochenkov that this is achievable

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why replace `#![no_std]` with `#![deny(std_use)]`?*][why-replace-no_std-with-deny-std_use]

### `rustc_dep_of_std`
[rustc_dep_of_std]: #rustc_dep_of_std

With first-class explicit dependencies on the standard library,
`rustc_dep_of_std` is rendered unnecessary and explicit dependencies on the
standard library can always be present in the `Cargo.toml` of the standard
library's dependencies.

The `core`, `alloc` and `std` dependencies can be patched in the standard
library's workspace to point to the local copy of the crates.

## Rebuilding the standard library
[rebuilding-the-standard-library]: #rebuilding-the-standard-library

> Cargo configuration will contain a new top-level key `build-std`, permitting one

Reviewer: I would suggest including a description of how this key aggregates (or does not) across the build graph. Eg if you have `crate A --depends--> crate B` and crate A contains `build-std = "target-modifiers"` and crate B has `build-std = "always"`, then which value does cargo use?

Author: They don't - it's part of the Cargo configuration, `.config/cargo.toml` rather than in a `Cargo.toml`, so there's no aggregation across the build graph. I've added `.config/cargo` in parenthesis here to make that clearer.

of three values - "off", "target-modifiers" (default) or "always":

```toml
build-std = "target-modifiers" # or `off`/`always`
```

*See [Unresolved questions][unresolved-questions] to bikeshed which section the
`build-std` key should be in and what it should be named.*

Cargo will use the pre-built standard library `rlib`s from the `rust-std`
component to provide the standard library depending on the value of the
`build-std` key:

- If `build-std = "off"`, then the pre-built standard library artifact is always
  used. If it is not present or is incompatible with the rest of the crate graph
  (due to target modifiers), rustc will emit an error.
- If `build-std = "target-modifiers"`, then the pre-built standard library will
  be used as long as it was compiled with target modifiers compatible with the
  current profile.

> - If `build-std = "always"`, then the pre-built standard library will be used

Reviewer: nit: "always" sounds like it will *always* rebuild the standard library even if there's a matching one already built. Consider choosing a different name like "match-profile" or other more descriptive names.

Reviewer 4: While bikeshedding, perhaps if the key were "rebuild-builtins", the context becomes clearer. The options could be off, required, full or something similar.

Author: Changed it to "match-profile" and added a bikeshed to the unresolved questions section

the release profile, the release profile of the standard library workspace will
be used. If the profile of the user's crate sets a configuration option, that
will be merged with the standard library's profile (e.g. if the user sets
`profile.release opt-level` that will override the standard library's release
`opt-level`, or if the user sets `profile.release.rustflags` that will be
appended to the standard library's release `rustflags`).

Profile overrides in the standard library's workspace continue to apply to its
dependencies. User profile overrides can only apply to the `std`, `alloc` and
`core` crates. 

**TODO:** discuss moving config into profile from bootstrap

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*
- [*Why not always rebuild when the profile changes?*][why-not-always-rebuild-when-the-profile-changes]
- [*Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std`?*][why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std]
- [*Why respect profile overrides of the standard library's workspace?*][why-respect-profile-overrides-of-the-standard-librarys-workspace]

### Preventing implicit sysroot dependencies
[preventing-implicit-sysroot-dependencies]: #preventing-implicit-sysroot-dependencies

> Cargo will pass a new `--no-implicit-sysroot-deps` flag to rustc which will

Reviewer: Suggestion: It might be helpful at RFC time to have an appendix which contains a list of every feature that needs to be implemented, tagged with the team(s) primarily responsible for the implementation and maintenance of the feature.

Author: I've added an appendix section for this but not written it yet, will let us narrow down what we want to do first before doing that

`core` dependency explicitly to opt-out of the implicit `std` dependency), then
Cargo will not build either of the `panic_unwind` or `panic_abort` crates or
pass `-Cpanic` to rustc. In this circumstance, if `panic` is set in the Cargo
profile, then this value will be ignored and Cargo will emit a warning informing
the user of this.

If the crate does depend on `std`, then Cargo's behaviour depends on whether or
not `panic` is set in the profile:

- If `panic` is not set in the profile then unwinding may still be the default
  for the target and Cargo will need to enable the `panic_unwind` feature to the
  standard library just in case it is used.
- If `panic` is set to "unwind" then the `panic_unwind` feature will be enabled
  and `-Cpanic=unwind` will be passed.
- If `panic` is set to "abort" then `-Cpanic=abort` will be passed.
  - `panic_abort` is a non-optional dependency of `std` so it will always be
    built.

Tests, benchmarks, build scripts and proc macros continue to ignore the "panic"
setting and `panic = "unwind"` is always used. Once `panic-abort-tests` is
stabilised, the standard library can be built with the profile's panic strategy

> even for tests, benchmarks, build scripts and procedural macros.

Reviewer: `panic = "abort"` is somewhat problematic for proc macros as they will kill rustc outright if a panic occurs which looks to the user like a rustc bug. I would suggest pulling back this statement to just encompass tests and benchmarks.

Author: Fixed

*Possibilities for avoiding unnecessary `panic_unwind` builds are explored in
[Future possibilities][future-possibilities].*

### Special object files
[special-object-files]: #special-object-files

A handful of targets require linking against special object files, such as
`windows-gnu`, `linux-musl` and `wasi` targets. For example, `linux-musl`
targets require `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, `crtn.o`, etc.

Since [rust#76185]/[compiler-team#343], the compiler has a stable
`-Clink-self-contained` flag which will look for special object files in
expected locations, typically populated by the `rust-std` components. Its
behaviour can be forced by `-Clink-self-contained=true`, but is force-enabled
for some targets and inferred for others.

> Rust can start to ship `rust-self-contained-$target` components for any targets

Reviewer 4: Is the intention that these are shipped for tier 3 targets too?

Author: Yes, will clarify this

which need it. These components will contain the special object files normally
included in `rust-std`, and will be distributed for all tiers of targets. While
generally these objects are specific to the architecture and C runtime (CRT)
(and so `rust-self-contained-$arch-$crt` could be sufficient and result in fewer
overall components), it's technically possible that Rust could support two
targets with the same architecture and same CRT but different versions of the
CRT, so having target-specific components is most future-proof. These would
replace the `self-contained` directory in existing `rust-std` components.

As long as these components have been downloaded, as well as any other support
components, such as `rust-mingw`, rustc's `-Clink-self-contained` will be able
to link against the object files and build-std should never fail on account of
missing special object files.

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps suggest that customization of these files (either "bring your own" or "change their build flags") is a possible future extension?

Author: Added a future possibility for this

### Potential migration breakage
[potential-migration-breakage]: #potential-migration-breakage

> When building an existing `no_std` project for a tier three target with

Reviewer: I'm not sure this situation is specific to only Tier 3 targets, eg we have Tier 2 `*-none` bare metal targets that do not support the standard library.

Author: Changed this to "two or three"

library performed by build-std.

[`cargo fetch`][cargo-fetch] will not fetch the standard library dependencies as
they are already vendored in the `rust-src` component.

[`cargo info`][cargo-info] will learn how to print information for the built-in
`std`, `alloc` and `core` dependencies:

```shell-session
$ cargo info std
std
rust standard library
license: Apache 2.0 + MIT
rust-version: 1.86.0
documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.86.0/std/index.html
```

```shell-session
$ cargo info alloc
alloc
rust standard library
license: Apache 2.0 + MIT
rust-version: 1.86.0
documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.86.0/alloc/index.html
```

```shell-session
$ cargo info core
core
rust standard library
license: Apache 2.0 + MIT
rust-version: 1.86.0
documentation: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.86.0/core/index.html
```

[`cargo metadata`][cargo-metadata] will emit `std`, `alloc` and `core`
dependencies to the metadata emitted by `cargo metadata` (when those crates are
dependencies). None of the standard library's dependencies will be included.
`source` would be set to `builtin` and the remaining fields would be set like
any other dependency.

**TODO:** show example output

> [`cargo miri`][cargo-miri] could be re-implemented using build-std to enable a

Reviewer: This is a custom command right, not part of Cargo itself?

Author: That's right, I've added a mention of that

(e.g. sanitisers and branch protection in the compiler team, amongst others).
Inaction forces these users to remain on nightly and depend on the unstable
`-Zbuild-std` flag indefinitely. RFCs and discussion dating back to the first
stable release of the language demonstrate the longevitity of build-std as a
need.

## Shouldn't build-std be part of rustup?
[shouldnt-build-std-be-part-of-rustup]: #shouldnt-build-std-be-part-of-rustup

build-std is effectively creating a new sysroot with a customised standard
library[^2]. rustup as Rust's toolchain manager has lots of existing machinery
to create and maintain sysroots. rustup knows how to download `rust-src`, it
knows how to create a new toolchain from an existing sysroot (as in
`rustup toolchain link`), it would only need to learn how to invoke Cargo on the
`rust-src` sources. rustup would be invoking tools from the next layer of
abstraction (Cargo) in the same way that Cargo invokes tools from the layer of
abstraction after it (rustc).

A brief prototype of this idea was created and
[short design document was drafted][why-not-rustup] before concluding that it

> would not be possible. With artifact dependencies, it may be desirable to build

Reviewer: The other pretty significant issue was the confusion that occurs when the build-std target is the same as the host. Eg which sysroot should rustc use when passed `--target $HOST`? It's critical for proc-macros to use the same sysroot that rustc was compiled with as otherwise ABI breaks can cause UB during proc macro execution.

Since build-std target will often be the same as the host, this is a significant but not insurmountable issue.

Author: Added a sentence for this

maintained by t-compiler but in close coordination with library and other
relevant teams.

## Why replace `restricted_std` with explicit standard library support for a target?
[why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target]: #why-replace-restricted_std-with-explicit-standard-library-support-for-a-target

`restricted_std` was originally added as part of a mechanism to enable the
standard library to build on all targets (just with stubbed out functionality),
however stability is not an ideal match for this use case. When `restricted_std`
applies, users must add `#![feature(restricted_std)]` to opt-in to using the
standard library anyway (conditionally, only for affected targets), and have no
mechanism for opting-in on behalf of their dependencies (including first-party
crates like `libtest`).

## Why disallow custom targets?
[why-disallow-custom-targets]: #why-disallow-custom-targets

While custom targets can be used on stable today, in practice, they are only
used on nightly as `-Zbuild-std` would need to be used to build at least `core`.
As such, if build-std were to be stabilised, custom targets would become much
more usable on stable toolchains.

> In order to avoid users relying on the unstable target-spec-json format on a

Reviewer: Perhaps include a link to https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/71009 here?

  this be unnecessary and wasteful for `no_std` crates in the embedded
  ecosystem, but sometimes a target may not support building `std` at all and
  this would cause the build to fail.
- rustc could support a `--print` value that would print whether the crate
  declares itself as `#![no_std]` crate, and based on this, Cargo could build
  `std` or only `core`. Cargo would also need to know whether to build `alloc`
  too, which checking for `#![no_std]` does not help with. Cargo could go
  further and ask rustc whether a crate (or its dependencies) used `alloc`, but
  this seems needlessly complicated.

Furthermore, supporting explicit dependencies on standard library crates enables
use of other Cargo features that apply to dependencies in a natural and
intuitive way. If there were not explicit standard library dependencies and
enabling features on the `std` crate was desirable, then a mechanism other than
the standard syntax for this would be necessary, such as a flag (e.g.
`-Zbuild-std-features`) or option in Cargo's configuration. This also applies to
optional dependencies, public/private features, etc.

> **TODO:** document alternatives, or at least link to "why not automatic" below

Reviewer: With the frontmatter feature (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/136889), Cargo needs the capability to parse Rust source anyway so I think it's a reasonable alternative to suggest it could detect the presence of `#![no_std]`. As you say above though, the main reason not to do that is it does not enable the idiomatic use of other Cargo features.

Author: Added to the TODO to mention this

Explicit standard library dependencies with `builtin = true` will necessarily
only be understood by newer versions of Cargo.

If all packages were required to add explicit dependencies (perhaps over an
edition or through some other mechanism), then every crate would require the
newest version of Cargo to be understood, effectively raising the MSRV of every
Rust crate.

If only `no_std` crates (or crates with a `no_std` feature) add explicit
dependencies on `core` or `alloc` then a much smaller percentage of the crates
ecosystem will require the newest Cargo versions for their new explicit standard
library dependencies to be understood.

Alternative syntaxes, such as requiring `version = "*"` for explicit standard
library dependencies, could be worthwhile to maintain a greater level of
compatibility with older toolchain versions. However, as any currently accepted
syntax would necessarily be interpreted differently by the build-std-supporting
versions of Cargo, this doesn't really solve anything. For example, while
`version = "*"` would be understood by older versions of Cargo, it would attempt

> to find the standard library crates on crates.io and fail. This is not a

Reviewer: Maybe explore this a bit more? Eg, why don't we publish empty `std`, `core` and `alloc` crates there which resolves this issue? You then need a new Cargo to be able to use build-std but there's no ecosystem breakage by crates starting to adopt the explicit dependency.

Author: That's a good idea, it's tempting to propose this instead, so it's worth raising at our sync call, but I've just corrected the description here for the moment

- Re-building the standard library does not require an internet connection
- Standard library dependency versions are fixed to those in the `Cargo.lock`
  anyway, so the same versions would be being downloaded every time if not
  vendored

..and few disadvantages:

- A larger `rust-src` component takes up more disk space and takes longer to
  download
- Vendored dependencies can't be updated with the latest security fixes

See
[*Why use the lockfile of the `rust-src` component?*][why-use-the-lockfile-of-the-rust-src-component]

## Why not ship a debug profile `rust-std`?
[why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std]: #why-not-ship-a-debug-profile-rust-std

As the default configuration for `build-std` is `target-modifiers`, debug builds
of the user's crate would not trigger a rebuild of the standard library and
would use the pre-built standard library. It would only be when
`build-std = "always"` that any debug build would first trigger a rebuild of the
standard library.

To improve the user experience in this circumstance, it could be worth shipping
a debug profile `rust-std`, but as this is not the common case, it isn't
proposed in this RFC.

> 

Reviewer: Might be worth calling out that some things like intrinsics rely on optimization happening otherwise they might not lower into exactly one instruction which could be counterintuitive to users.

Author: Added a mention of this

- [`cargo version`][cargo-version]
- [`cargo yank`][cargo-yank]

## Cargo implemenation changes

> [cargo-changes]: #cargo-changes

Author: I don't think this should be in its own section, all of the above is Cargo implementation changes, there's no reason this ought to have its own section. Change it to a subsection of "Standard library dependencies"

> ### Registry index JSON

Author: Add a section to the "Background" describing what the registry index is and what it does/is used for

[registry-index-json]: #registry-index-json

> A new key is added to the [JSON schema][cargo-json-schema], named `builtin_deps`. This key

Author: Add a "Why represent builtin dependencies with their own field in the index?" justification mentioning the future-compatibility with new fields and link it from here and the end-of-section

In this justification, also elaborate on the alternative, adding it to the regular deps and bumping the version, etc.

is conceptually similar to `deps` and its type is a list of JSON objects, each
representing a dependency that is "builtin" to the Rust toolchain and cannot be
found in the registry. The keys of these objects are as follows:

- `name`:
  The `builtin` package name. The name can shadow other packages in the
  registry, which is required as standard library crates are technically not

>   disallowed on third-party registries, though `crates.io` forbids it.

Author: Move this part to a rationale, just say "The builtin package name, which can shadow the names of packages in the `deps` section"

> which is required as standard library crates are technically not disallowed on third-party registries, though `crates.io` forbids it.

Author: "technically not disallowed" is also a bit of a contrived wording - we can say permitted and not warned against, or something like that

- `features`:
  An array of strings representing enabled features in order to support changing
  the standard library features on nightly. crates.io should disallow setting

>   this to anything but an empty array. Optional, and an empty array is the

Author: > crates.io should disallow setting this to anything but an empty array.

Why? We allow publishing nightly-only crates, this is no different.

Reviewer 4: Huh, didn't realise this

  default value.
- `default_features`:
  Inherited from `deps` with the same definition. crates.io should disallow

>   setting this to anything except the default `true`.

Author: As above.

- `optional`, `target`, `kind`, `package`:
  These keys are inherited from `deps`, with the same definition.

The following keys from `deps` are not required:

- `req`:
  All standard library packages have a version of `0.0.0`, meaning this key no
  longer has a purpose. Compatibility with older versions of the Rust toolchain

>   is managed by the `rust_version` key in the JSON schema.

Author: What does the `rust_version` key do? What version is it set to?

- `registry`:
  Not required as all deps are provided by the toolchain rather than a registry.

> Older versions of Cargo will ignore any `builtin_deps` keys and continue to

Author: We should only mention this in this section if it is a property we are introducing - it is ambigious as to whether we're declaring here that new keys are ignored or relying on that being an existing fact. We should probably just mention this in the rationale I requested above.

function even if newer crates are released with some defined. The key is
optional and its default value will be the implicit `std` dependency:

```json
"builtin_deps" : [
    {
        "name": "std",
        "features": [],
        "optional": false,
        "default_features": true,
        "target": null,
        "kind": "normal",

>         "package": null

Author: Are dependencies normally included in the index? Don't answer this here, I should know whether or not they are because of the background section introducing the index and what it contains/is used for.

    }
]
```

- [*Why add standard library crates to Cargo's index?*][rationale-cargo-index]

### Cargo-util-schemas
[cargo-util-schemas]: #cargo-util-schemas

> In order to model builtin packages that may not need to be built from source a

Author: Which builtin packages may not need to be built from source?

> new [`SourceKind`][cargo-sourcekind] variant will be added, named `PreBuilt`.

Author: Referencing the specific types that need extended is too much detail. I don't think we need this subsection. Unless "cargo-util-schemas" is some user-exposed concept, I don't think we need to reference it, if it needs adjusted as part of the implementation then that's for the implementation to decide, not the RFC.

Reviewer 4: It feels a bit too in-depth, yeah. I also suspect the new enum should be `builtin` - I don't think this enum is used after resolution so it should be agonostic as to whether build-std is on or not.

When Cargo builds the dependency graph, it is driven by the index (not
`Cargo.toml`), so builtin dependencies need to be included in the index.

> Even if a `builtin` package can be unambiguously represented as an entry in

Author: s/can/could

Instead of "Even if", something like "If we were to represent.."

> the `deps` key, older versions of Cargo expect to find packages either in the

Author: s/Cargo expect/Cargo would expect/

current registry or at the URL under the `registry` key. This could cause them
to fail upon encountering a `builtin` package not in a registry. Adding "dummy"
`builtin` packages to every registry (named after `std`, `alloc` and `core`,
which are not permitted names on `crates.io`) to registries would not work as
they would be passed into `rustc` build invocations via `extern`, preventing

> loading the real crates from the sysroot.

Author: Above we propose passing std/alloc/core by `--extern`, even when they're in sysroot.

Reviewer 4: This is referring to old versions of Cargo
